If it were love , it might be simple , single , successless love on her side alone .
She was obliged to go the next morning for an hour or two to Mrs . Goddard ' s , but it was then to be settled that she should return to Hartfield , to make a regular visit of some days .
My first displays the wealth and pomp of kings , Lords of the earth !
They dined with us last ."
" But you may come again in the cool of to - morrow morning ."
" I suppose you have heard of the handsome letter Mr . Frank Churchill has written to Mrs . Weston ?
We never can expect to prove any thing upon such a point .
" At Marlborough !"
He had , very soon after their engagement ceased , got employ : and all that he had told her would follow , had taken place .
Clarke ."
You are making a most disgraceful connection , and such a one as your family are unanimous in disapproving .'
" Pray , Mr . Knightley ," said Emma , who had been smiling to herself through a great part of this speech , " how do you know that Mr . Martin did not speak yesterday ?"
Her ideas only varied as to the how much .
I am not one of those who have witty things at every body ' s service .
A walk before breakfast does me good ."
" And I will tell you our reason ," she added , " and all about it .
The refreshment of Randalls was absolutely necessary .
The stupidest fellow !
Every additional day of unhappy confidence , on your side , would have made the blow more dreadful ."
Anne found Captain Benwick getting near her , as soon as they were all fairly in the street .
And she did not feel much delighted with the idea of such a sister - in - law .
It was transient : cleared away in an instant ; but Anne could imagine she read there the consciousness of having , by some complication of mutual trick , or some overbearing authority of his , been obliged to attend ( perhaps for half an hour ) to his lectures and restrictions on her designs on Sir Walter .
And soon afterwards , on the second boy ' s violently pinching one of the same lady ' s fingers , she fondly observed , " How playful William is !"
His good - nature , his humanity , as I tell you , would be quite enough to account for the horses .
I believe you were glad we danced no longer ; but I would have given worlds -- all the worlds one ever has to give -- for another half - hour ."
He bowed .
" Certainly not ; but if you observe , people always live for ever when there is an annuity to be paid them ; and she is very stout and healthy , and hardly forty .
If I am a fool , I shall be a fool indeed , for I have thought on the subject more than most men ."
It was quite a different sort of thing , a sentiment distinct and independent .
" Yes , Sir , a Mr Elliot , a gentleman of large fortune , came in last night from Sidmouth .
Used only to a large house himself , and without ever thinking how many advantages and accommodations were attached to its size , he could be no judge of the privations inevitably belonging to a small one .
We do not call Bermuda or Bahama , you know , the West Indies ."
what should hinder it ?"
She has abilities , however , as well as affections ; and it is now a doubtful point whether his cunning , or hers , may finally carry the day ; whether , after preventing her from being the wife of Sir Walter , he may not be wheedled and caressed at last into making her the wife of Sir William .
Elinor felt equal amazement .
You wrote in the cheerfullest manner , and said you were perfectly well , and in no hurry for me ; and that being the case , you must be aware that my wish would be to remain with Lady Russell to the last : and besides what I felt on her account , I have really been so busy , have had so much to do , that I could not very conveniently have left Kellynch sooner ."
" You have some news to hear , now you are come back , that will rather surprize you ."
" But she raises none in those most concerned .
Nothing hastily done ; nothing incomplete .
" Oh !"
" M . D ."
They ought to be setting off for Uppercross by one , and in the mean while were to be all together , and out of doors as long as they could .
With great surprise therefore , did she find herself prevented by a settled rain from going out again after dinner .
He begged to be shewn the house which his father had lived in so long , and which had been the home of his father ' s father ; and on recollecting that an old woman who had nursed him was still living , walked in quest of her cottage from one end of the street to the other ; and though in some points of pursuit or observation there was no positive merit , they shewed , altogether , a good - will towards Highbury in general , which must be very like a merit to those he was with .
Miss Woodhouse , must you be going ?-- You seem but just come -- so very obliging of you ."
She went to it ; but the music on which her eye first rested was an opera , procured for her by Willoughby , containing some of their favourite duets , and bearing on its outward leaf her own name in his hand - writing .-- That would not do .-- She shook her head , put the music aside , and after running over the keys for a minute , complained of feebleness in her fingers , and closed the instrument again ; declaring however with firmness as she did so , that she should in future practice much .
But I have no idea that she has yet ever seen a man she cared for .
I would be understood to mean , that it can be only weak , irresolute characters , ( whose happiness must be always at the mercy of chance ,) who will suffer an unfortunate acquaintance to be an inconvenience , an oppression for ever ."
" Mr . Martin , I suppose , is not a man of information beyond the line of his own business ?
If I had such a memory as Benwick , I could bring you fifty quotations in a moment on my side the argument , and I do not think I ever opened a book in my life which had not something to say upon woman ' s inconstancy .
Perhaps Fanny thought for a moment that her mother had been quite rude enough ,-- for , colouring a little , she immediately said ,
They had been all in lodgings together .
And there , beneath that farthest hill , which rises with such grandeur , is our cottage ."
.
He looked completely astonished , but not more astonished than pleased ; his eyes brightened !
She allowed him to talk , and arranged the glasses , and wrapped herself up , without opening her lips .
Elinor , too , was deeply afflicted ; but still she could struggle , she could exert herself .
Perry ' s setting up his carriage !
" What are Mrs . Ferrars ' s views for you at present , Edward ?"
How can you be so cross as not to come ?
But between _us_ , I am convinced there never can be any likeness , except in being unmarried ."
They brought with them their country habit of being almost always together .
" I never in my life saw a man more intent on being agreeable than Mr . Elton .
I am sure I shall be very happy to chaperon you at any time till I am confined , if Mrs . Dashwood should not like to go into public ."
The selfish sagacity of the latter , which had at first drawn Robert into the scrape , was the principal instrument of his deliverance from it ; for her respectful humility , assiduous attentions , and endless flatteries , as soon as the smallest opening was given for their exercise , reconciled Mrs . Ferrars to his choice , and re - established him completely in her favour .
A poor widow barely able to live , between thirty and forty ; a mere Mrs Smith , an every - day Mrs Smith , of all people and all names in the world , to be the chosen friend of Miss Anne Elliot , and to be preferred by her to her own family connections among the nobility of England and Ireland !
Lucy first put an end to it by saying in a lower tone , though Marianne was then giving them the powerful protection of a very magnificent concerto --
cried Marianne , stepping hastily forward .
_She_ was not present when the suspicion first arose .
My being the mother is the very reason why my feelings should not be tried .
Everything now marked out Louisa for Captain Wentworth ; nothing could be plainer ; and where many divisions were necessary , or even where they were not , they walked side by side nearly as much as the other two .
With such encouragement as this , was she dismissed on the present occasion , to her brother ' s carriage ; which they were ready to enter five minutes after it stopped at the door , a punctuality not very agreeable to their sister - in - law , who had preceded them to the house of her acquaintance , and was there hoping for some delay on their part that might inconvenience either herself or her coachman .
I knew how it would be .
He was not handsome , and his manners required intimacy to make them pleasing .
This brought his sister upon him .
very unaccountable !
If he were to be very alert in engaging Jane Fairfax now , it might augur something .
" We are assured of it ."
And as for objects of interest , objects for the affections , which is in truth the great point of inferiority , the want of which is really the great evil to be avoided in _not_ marrying , I shall be very well off , with all the children of a sister I love so much , to care about .
" I am NOT going to write to my mother ," replied Marianne , hastily , and as if wishing to avoid any farther inquiry .
He looked rather distressed as he added , that he had been staying with some friends near Plymouth .
thinks she to herself , ' they are all so fond of Lucy , to be sure they will make no difficulty about it ;' and so , away she went to your sister , who was sitting all alone at her carpet - work , little suspecting what was to come -- for she had just been saying to your brother , only five minutes before , that she thought to make a match between Edward and some Lord ' s daughter or other , I forget who .
The difference which Randalls , Randalls alone makes in your goings - on , is very great ."
She wanted me to nurse my cold by staying at home to - day , and yet will not promise to avoid the danger of catching an ulcerated sore throat herself .
She is never tired of playing ."
But two advantages will proceed from this delay .
The invitation was accepted ; but when the hour of appointment drew near , necessary as it was in common civility to Mrs . Jennings , that they should both attend her on such a visit , Elinor had some difficulty in persuading her sister to go , for still she had seen nothing of Willoughby ; and therefore was not more indisposed for amusement abroad , than unwilling to run the risk of his calling again in her absence .
" Will you ?"
Has there been any inconsistency on his side to create alarm ?
" This will prove a spirited beginning of your winter engagements , sir .
Emma could not have desired a more spirited rejection of Mr . Martin ' s prose .
" My dear ," was Mrs Smith ' s reply , " there was nothing else to be done .
She is pretty , and she is good tempered , and that is all .
Will it not be wiser to accept the society of those good ladies in Laura Place , and enjoy all the advantages of the connexion as far as possible ?
I was late ; I met her walking home by herself , and wanted to walk with her , but she would not suffer it .
but Jane Fairfax has them both , Harriet ."
When the particulars of this conversation were repeated by Miss Dashwood to her sister , as they very soon were , the effect on her was not entirely such as the former had hoped to see .
But Harriet rejected the suspicion with spirit .
Lord bless me !
The past was nothing .
A large debt of gratitude was owing here ; but the intercourse of the last seven years , the equal footing and perfect unreserve which had soon followed Isabella ' s marriage , on their being left to each other , was yet a dearer , tenderer recollection .
I was desired to say so from both .
Anne sometimes fancied she discerned him at a distance , but he never came .
The first ten minutes had its awkwardness and its emotion .
The night was cold and stormy .
Poor Perry is bilious , and he has not time to take care of himself -- he tells me he has not time to take care of himself -- which is very sad -- but he is always wanted all round the country .
I am not going to marry Mr Elliot .
But perseverance in humility of conduct and messages , in self - condemnation for Robert ' s offence , and gratitude for the unkindness she was treated with , procured her in time the haughty notice which overcame her by its graciousness , and led soon afterwards , by rapid degrees , to the highest state of affection and influence .
Emma remained in a state of vexation too ; but there was more indistinctness in the causes of her ' s , than in his .
" I am flattered by his commendation .
Her nerves were under continual irritation and suffering ; and by the ten days ' end , her nephew ' s letter to Randalls communicated a change of plan .
Nobody else would come so early .'
The Miss Musgrove , that all this has been happening to .
Her pulse was much stronger , and every symptom more favourable than on the preceding visit .
For her own sake she could not be rude ; and for Harriet ' s , in the hope that all would yet turn out right , she was even positively civil ; but it was an effort ; especially as something was going on amongst the others , in the most overpowering period of Mr . Elton ' s nonsense , which she particularly wished to listen to .
It had cost her something to encounter Lady Russell ' s surprise ; and now , if she were by any chance to be thrown into company with Captain Wentworth , her imperfect knowledge of the matter might add another shade of prejudice against him .
He found he could not be useful , and his feelings were too much irritated for talking .
He had the air of congratulating himself on having brought such a woman to Highbury , as not even Miss Woodhouse could equal ; and the greater part of her new acquaintance , disposed to commend , or not in the habit of judging , following the lead of Miss Bates ' s good - will , or taking it for granted that the bride must be as clever and as agreeable as she professed herself , were very well satisfied ; so that Mrs . Elton ' s praise passed from one mouth to another as it ought to do , unimpeded by Miss Woodhouse , who readily continued her first contribution and talked with a good grace of her being " very pleasant and very elegantly dressed ."
" Ah , my dear ," said he , " poor Miss Taylor -- It is a grievous business ."
really , never !-- Bless me !
Suppose I were to be seized of a sudden in some dreadful way , and not able to ring the bell !
To that point went every leisure moment which her father ' s claims on her allowed , and every moment of involuntary absence of mind .
They could then see that she looked very ill , were shocked and concerned , and would not stir without her for the world .
Depend upon it , that was the case : and very likely to happen with the Donwell servants , who are all , I have often observed , extremely awkward and remiss .-- I am sure I would not have such a creature as his Harry stand at our sideboard for any consideration .
Mr . Churchill had made a point of it , as a token of respect to the wife he had so very recently lost ; and every body admitted it to be no more than due decorum ."
She would not have been obstinate if I had not been weak .
She and Mrs . Weston were obliged to be almost always either talking together or silent together .
This invitation of Mary ' s removed all Lady Russell ' s difficulties , and it was consequently soon settled that Anne should not go to Bath till Lady Russell took her , and that all the intervening time should be divided between Uppercross Cottage and Kellynch Lodge .
" I would by no means speak disrespectfully of any relation of yours , madam .
When she looked at the hedges , she thought the elder at least must soon be coming out ; and when she turned round to Harriet , she saw something like a look of spring , a tender smile even there .
what can be the meaning of it !
It stood the record of many sensations of pain , once severe , but now softened ; and of some instances of relenting feeling , some breathings of friendship and reconciliation , which could never be looked for again , and which could never cease to be dear .
" No , indeed , I have no doubts at all on that head .
" Perhaps you do not know -- you may not have heard that my brother is lately married to -- to the youngest -- to Miss Lucy Steele ."
It is now three years ago ( she had just reached her fourteenth year ,) that I removed her from school , to place her under the care of a very respectable woman , residing in Dorsetshire , who had the charge of four or five other girls of about the same time of life ; and for two years I had every reason to be pleased with her situation .
made her quite sorry to acknowledge that they had transcribed it some pages ago already .
Mr and Mrs Musgrove were a very good sort of people ; friendly and hospitable , not much educated , and not at all elegant .
Ever since I left you this morning , Emma , my mind has been hard at work on one subject ."
Each lady was previously well disposed for an agreement , and saw nothing , therefore , but good manners in the other ; and with regard to the gentlemen , there was such an hearty good humour , such an open , trusting liberality on the Admiral ' s side , as could not but influence Sir Walter , who had besides been flattered into his very best and most polished behaviour by Mr Shepherd ' s assurances of his being known , by report , to the Admiral , as a model of good breeding .
" For shame , for shame , Miss Dashwood !
Now , if your friends have any gratitude , they will say something pretty loud about you and me in return ; but I cannot stay to hear it ."
Before the house - maid had lit their fire the next day , or the sun gained any power over a cold , gloomy morning in January , Marianne , only half dressed , was kneeling against one of the window - seats for the sake of all the little light she could command from it , and writing as fast as a continual flow of tears would permit her .
They had by dint of being so very much together , got to speak to each other with a considerable portion of apparent indifference and calmness ; but he could not do it now .
" I do not know what your opinion may be , Mrs . Weston ," said Mr . Knightley , " of this great intimacy between Emma and Harriet Smith , but I think it a bad thing ."
She acknowledged it to be very fitting , that every little social commonwealth should dictate its own matters of discourse ; and hoped , ere long , to become a not unworthy member of the one she was now transplanted into .
I need not ask after her .
One wonders how the names of many of our nobility become so common ."
My friend Robert could not resist .
Then , here come all my attempts at three of those four children ;-- there they are , Henry and John and Bella , from one end of the sheet to the other , and any one of them might do for any one of the rest .
My Emma , does not every thing serve to prove more and more the beauty of truth and sincerity in all our dealings with each other ?"
Ay , so it always is , I believe .
She was perfectly convinced of it .
" Heir presumptive , William Walter Elliot , Esq ., great grandson of the second Sir Walter ."
She had been particularly unwell , however , suffering from headache to a degree , which made her aunt declare , that had the ball taken place , she did not think Jane could have attended it ; and it was charity to impute some of her unbecoming indifference to the languor of ill - health .
" I shall never let that book go out of my own hands ," said she .
The folly of the means they often employ is only to be equalled by the folly of what they have in view ."
He therefore replied , without any resentment ,
" And really , I do not think the impression will soon be over ," said Emma , as she crossed the low hedge , and tottering footstep which ended the narrow , slippery path through the cottage garden , and brought them into the lane again .
But from one cause or another , I gave it up in disgust .
If I could but see her again !-- But I must not propose it yet .
Marianne to be sure is lost to me for ever .
I was told that they wished it .
" Happy for her , to have such a mind as yours at hand !
A ready - furnished house in a favourite spot was engaged , and much benefit expected from the change .
" I can hardly tell myself .
In such a situation as that , where there seemed nothing to tempt the avarice or the vanity of any living creature , how could I suppose , when she so earnestly , so warmly insisted on sharing my fate , whatever it might be , that any thing but the most disinterested affection was her inducement ?
" Oh !
He was to come to breakfast , but not at the Cottage , though that had been proposed at first ; but then he had been pressed to come to the Great House instead , and he seemed afraid of being in Mrs Charles Musgrove ' s way , on account of the child , and therefore , somehow , they hardly knew how , it ended in Charles ' s being to meet him to breakfast at his father ' s .
I know what it is , for Mr Musgrove always attends the assizes , and I am so glad when they are over , and he is safe back again ."
Miss Bates should never again -- no , never !
He was accused of having a delightful voice , and a perfect knowledge of music ; which was properly denied ; and that he knew nothing of the matter , and had no voice at all , roundly asserted .
The heir presumptive , the very William Walter Elliot , Esq ., whose rights had been so generously supported by her father , had disappointed her .
I hate to hear of women on board , or to see them on board ; and no ship under my command shall ever convey a family of ladies anywhere , if I can help it ."
Well , I shall bring Jane with me -- Jane and her aunt .-- The rest I leave to you .
" I have made a most wretched discovery ," said he , after a short pause .-- " I have been here a week to - morrow -- half my time .
I dream of every body at Highbury when I am away -- and when I have gone through my particular friends , then I begin dreaming of Mr . and Mrs .
Their conversation was soon afterwards closed by the entrance of her father .
Oh , said I , Patty do not come with your bad news to me .
my dear , but Perry had many doubts about the sea doing her any good ; and as to myself , I have been long perfectly convinced , though perhaps I never told you so before , that the sea is very rarely of use to any body .
I hope they are quite well .
But the expression is hardly admissible , Mrs . Weston , is it ?
snows a little I see ."
You never wrote a truer line ."
Marianne continued to mend every day , and the brilliant cheerfulness of Mrs . Dashwood ' s looks and spirits proved her to be , as she repeatedly declared herself , one of the happiest women in the world .
I will ask them all for an evening ; that will be much better ; that will be a novelty and a treat .
Anne had soon been in company with all the four together often enough to have an opinion , though too wise to acknowledge as much at home , where she knew it would have satisfied neither husband nor wife ; for while she considered Louisa to be rather the favourite , she could not but think , as far as she might dare to judge from memory and experience , that Captain Wentworth was not in love with either .
Emma returned her friend ' s pressure with interest ; and was pleased enough to exclaim ,
Emma ' s very good opinion of Frank Churchill was a little shaken the following day , by hearing that he was gone off to London , merely to have his hair cut .
Could Anne wonder that her father and sister were happy ?
CHAPTER 25
" Why , pretty well , my dear , upon the whole .
She rushed to the drawing - room ,-- she entered it ,-- and saw only Willoughby .
" You and I , Sir John ," said Mrs . Jennings , " should not stand upon such ceremony ."
He had done , and was unanswered .
Nobody , who has not been in the interior of a family , can say what the difficulties of any individual of that family may be .
It was by no means her object to have it believed that her sister was _not_ a fine lady ; perhaps there was want of spirit in the pretence of it ;-- and she was considering in what way she had best retract , when Mr . Weston went on .
We were always glad to see him at Hartfield ."
And Marianne was in spirits ; happy in the mildness of the weather , and still happier in her expectation of a frost .
The joy , the gratitude , the exquisite delight of her sensations may be imagined .
He was the son of Mr . Weston -- he was continually here -- I always found him very pleasant -- and , in short , for ( with a sigh ) let me swell out the causes ever so ingeniously , they all centre in this at last -- my vanity was flattered , and I allowed his attentions .
So ended all danger to Anne of meeting Captain Wentworth at Kellynch Hall , or of seeing him in company with her friend .
He remained at Hartfield after all the rest , his thoughts full of what he had seen ; so full , that when the candles came to assist his observations , he must -- yes , he certainly must , as a friend -- an anxious friend -- give Emma some hint , ask her some question .
Emma perceived that the nature of his gallantry was a little self - willed , and that he would rather oppose than lose the pleasure of dancing with her ; but she took the compliment , and forgave the rest .
" If you had been a week later at Lisbon , last spring , Frederick , you would have been asked to give a passage to Lady Mary Grierson and her daughters ."
" And do you really believe the affair to have been carrying on with such perfect secresy ?-- The Campbells , the Dixons , did none of them know of the engagement ?"
How the delicacy , the discretion of his favourite could have been so lain asleep !
To her , its greatest interest must be , in having been very much talked of between her friend and Mr Elliot ; in having been wished for , regretted , and at the same time honoured for staying away in such a cause .
Elton ?"
The same image of Mr Elliot speaking for himself brought Anne to composure again .
Has she run away because we are come ?
The steadiness of his manner , and the intelligence of his eye as he spoke , convincing Elinor , that whatever other unpardonable folly might bring him to Cleveland , he was not brought there by intoxication , she said , after a moment ' s recollection ,
One takes up a notion , and runs away with it .
" He will not come in , as Mrs . Jennings is from home ."
Harriet turned away ; but Emma could receive him with the usual smile , and her quick eye soon discerned in his the consciousness of having made a push -- of having thrown a die ; and she imagined he was come to see how it might turn up .
So then , I try to put it out of her thoughts , and say , Come ma ' am , do not let us think about it any more ."
I am sure , rather than run the risk of hurting Mr . and Mrs . Cole , you would stay a little longer than you might wish .
They were again silent for many minutes .
She was deep in the happiness of such misery , or the misery of such happiness , instantly .
Her father and sister were glad to see her , for the sake of shewing her the house and furniture , and met her with kindness .
I am a very poor Italian scholar ."
She had had three weeks of happy exemption from Mr . Elton ; and Harriet ' s mind , she had been willing to hope , had been lately gaining strength .
The backgammon - table was placed ; but a visitor immediately afterwards walked in and made it unnecessary .
The style of the visit , and the shortness of it , were then felt to be decisive .
How low it makes me !"
It was not with Mrs . Suckling , it was not with Mrs . Bragge , but in felicity and splendour it fell short only of them : it was with a cousin of Mrs . Bragge , an acquaintance of Mrs . Suckling , a lady known at Maple Grove .
In general she has been in very good health and very good looks since Michaelmas ."
I would not have you suffer on my account ; for I assure you I no longer suffer materially myself .
.
Marianne was surprised and confused , yet she could not help smiling at the quiet archness of his manner , and after a moment ' s silence , said ,
" Oh !
" Certainly ," replied he , surprized , " I do not absolutely know it ; but it may be inferred .
With respect to her father , it was a question soon answered .
" It was a frightful hour ," said he , " a frightful day !"
she cried with more thorough gaiety , " if you fancy your brother does not do me justice , only wait till my dear father is in the secret , and hear his opinion .
I am delighted to find myself in such a circle .
My Elinor , you do not yet know all my happiness .
Lucy went on .
I was reading it to Mrs . Cole , and since she went away , I was reading it again to my mother , for it is such a pleasure to her -- a letter from Jane -- that she can never hear it often enough ; so I knew it could not be far off , and here it is , only just under my huswife -- and since you are so kind as to wish to hear what she says ;-- but , first of all , I really must , in justice to Jane , apologise for her writing so short a letter -- only two pages you see -- hardly two -- and in general she fills the whole paper and crosses half .
Her jealous eye was satisfied in one particular .
It was accepted ; and from that period Jane had belonged to Colonel Campbell ' s family , and had lived with them entirely , only visiting her grandmother from time to time .
You and I must positively exert our authority ."
There is always some talent in it .
We will put it by , that when he comes again ... But it may be months , perhaps , before THAT happens ."
Emma was most sincerely interested .
Well , Colonel , I have brought two young ladies with me , you see -- that is , you see but one of them now , but there is another somewhere .
here is Winthrop .
This was so very well understood between them , that Emma could not but feel some surprise , and a little displeasure , on hearing from Mr . Weston that he had been proposing to Mrs . Elton , as her brother and sister had failed her , that the two parties should unite , and go together ; and that as Mrs . Elton had very readily acceded to it , so it was to be , if she had no objection .
Their good friend saw that Marianne was unhappy , and felt that every thing was due to her which might make her at all less so .
Will not it be a good plan ?
He does not draw himself , indeed , but he has great pleasure in seeing the performances of other people , and I assure you he is by no means deficient in natural taste , though he has not had opportunities of improving it .
Emma wished she had been alone with Mrs . Weston .
For once in your life you would be obliged to own yourself mistaken .
He was standing by himself at a printshop window , with his hands behind him , in earnest contemplation of some print , and she not only might have passed him unseen , but was obliged to touch as well as address him before she could catch his notice .
As to an additional servant , the expense would be a trifle ; Mamma she was sure would never object to it ; and any horse would do for HIM ; he might always get one at the park ; as to a stable , the merest shed would be sufficient .
I tell every body of it and so does Charlotte ."
She loves piquet , you know ; but when she is gone home , I am afraid you will be sitting up by yourself , instead of going to bed at your usual time -- and the idea of that would entirely destroy my comfort .
Mrs . Bates , the widow of a former vicar of Highbury , was a very old lady , almost past every thing but tea and quadrille .
She was not obliged to hear .
" I have not had the pleasure of visiting in Camden Place so long ," replied he , " without knowing something of Miss Anne Elliot ; and I do regard her as one who is too modest for the world in general to be aware of half her accomplishments , and too highly accomplished for modesty to be natural in any other woman ."
For many years of her life she had had two sons ; but the crime and annihilation of Edward a few weeks ago , had robbed her of one ; the similar annihilation of Robert had left her for a fortnight without any ; and now , by the resuscitation of Edward , she had one again .
" Yes , oh !
" If Mrs . Gilbert wishes to dance ," said he , " I shall have great pleasure , I am sure -- for , though beginning to feel myself rather an old married man , and that my dancing days are over , it would give me very great pleasure at any time to stand up with an old friend like Mrs .
Mr Elliot is a man without heart or conscience ; a designing , wary , cold - blooded being , who thinks only of himself ; whom for his own interest or ease , would be guilty of any cruelty , or any treachery , that could be perpetrated without risk of his general character .
This little explanation with Mr . Knightley gave Emma considerable pleasure .
I wonder which she will think the handsomest , Henry or John ?"
Neither wine nor conversation was any thing to him ; and gladly did he move to those with whom he was always comfortable .
Mrs . Dashwood was prudent enough to remain at the cottage , without attempting a removal to Delaford ; and fortunately for Sir John and Mrs . Jennings , when Marianne was taken from them , Margaret had reached an age highly suitable for dancing , and not very ineligible for being supposed to have a lover .
In any other place Sir Walter might judge for himself ; and would be looked up to , as regulating the modes of life in whatever way he might choose to model his household ."
At the same time , nobody could wonder if Mr . Elton should have aspired -- Miss Woodhouse lets me chatter on , so good - humouredly .
Forgive me , if I am very saucy .
He looked more than usually grave , and though expressing satisfaction at finding Miss Dashwood alone , as if he had somewhat in particular to tell her , sat for some time without saying a word .
You know very well that my opinion would have no weight with you , unless it were on the side of your wishes ."
exclaimed Elinor .
And as she could now have nothing more painful to hear on the subject than had already been told , she did not mistrust her own ability of going through a repetition of particulars with composure .
Various as were the tempers in her father ' s house , he pleased them all .
" She had seemed to recommend and praise him !"
I have explained it to myself in the most satisfactory way ;-- but you , Elinor , who love to doubt where you can -- it will not satisfy YOU , I know ; but you shall not talk ME out of my trust in it .
Her heart beat quick on hearing Harriet ' s footstep and voice ; so , she supposed , had poor Mrs . Weston felt when _she_ was approaching Randalls .
Harriet looked grave .
She had sent while dressing , and the answer had been , " Much the same -- not better ."
Were not you struck ?
" Was it from Avignon ?
One hears sometimes of a child being ` the picture of health ;' now , Emma always gives me the idea of being the complete picture of grown - up health .
Elinor perfectly understood her , and was forced to use all her self - command to make it appear that she did NOT .
She explained the situation .
It is not a connexion to gratify ; but if Mr . Churchill does not feel that , why should we ?
he continued ; " every day more precious and more delightful than the day before !-- every day making me less fit to bear any other place .
said she to the footman who then entered with the parcels .
Shall I mention to him your being in Bath ?
He had always a home with us whenever he chose it ; he was always welcome ; he was like a brother .
It can be allowable only as the thought of the moment ."
She was a little shocked at the want of two drawing rooms , at the poor attempt at rout - cakes , and there being no ice in the Highbury card - parties .
here is the charade you were so obliging as to leave with us ; thank you for the sight of it .
You will gain a brother , a real , affectionate brother .
The worst of Bath was the number of its plain women .
" And I am sure I should never want to go there ; for I am never happy but at Hartfield ."
They were cheered by the joy of the servants on their arrival , and each for the sake of the others resolved to appear happy .
He paused -- and growing cooler in a moment , added , with only sarcastic dryness , " If Mr . Perry can tell me how to convey a wife and five children a distance of an hundred and thirty miles with no greater expense or inconvenience than a distance of forty , I should be as willing to prefer Cromer to South End as he could himself ."
_Now_ I shall really be very happy to walk into the same room with you ."
On being informed of the invitation , Mrs . Dashwood , persuaded that such an excursion would be productive of much amusement to both her daughters , and perceiving through all her affectionate attention to herself , how much the heart of Marianne was in it , would not hear of their declining the offer upon HER account ; insisted on their both accepting it directly ; and then began to foresee , with her usual cheerfulness , a variety of advantages that would accrue to them all , from this separation .
she cried .--" And such weather for exploring !-- These delays and disappointments are quite odious .
I never saw Mrs . Weston better in my life -- never looking so well .
And he , the very handsomest man that ever was , and a man that every body looks up to , quite like Mr . Knightley !
In short , I do not mean to reflect upon the behaviour of any person whom you have a regard for , Mrs . Jennings .
She would not be ashamed of the appearance of the penitence , so justly and truly hers .
Her pleasure in the walk must arise from the exercise and the day , from the view of the last smiles of the year upon the tawny leaves , and withered hedges , and from repeating to herself some few of the thousand poetical descriptions extant of autumn , that season of peculiar and inexhaustible influence on the mind of taste and tenderness , that season which had drawn from every poet , worthy of being read , some attempt at description , or some lines of feeling .
.
I am sure if I had had a notion of it , I would not have joked her about it for all my money .
They both seemed delighted with their drive ; but said only in general terms that they had kept in the lanes , while the others went on the downs .
Emma ' s spirits were mounted quite up to happiness ; every thing wore a different air ; James and his horses seemed not half so sluggish as before .
Now they seemed in pleasant conversation .
Elton ?"
CHAPTER XVI
There were but few who could be so classed ; and it was not all of them that were attainable .
Dr . Davies was coming to town , and so we thought we ' d join him in a post - chaise ; and he behaved very genteelly , and paid ten or twelve shillings more than we did ."
If I were you , whatever I did should be done at my own discretion entirely .
" True , true ," he answered , warmly .
The happiness of Miss Smith was quite equal to her intentions .
Do you mean with regard to this letter ?"
I am not conscious of having provoked the disappointment by any imprudence of my own , I have borne it as much as possible without spreading it farther .
My illness has made me think -- It has given me leisure and calmness for serious recollection .
He had a heart for either of the Miss Musgroves , if they could catch it ; a heart , in short , for any pleasing young woman who came in his way , excepting Anne Elliot .
The usefulness of her staying !
I do not believe I did you any good .
From you , her mother , and so kind , so indulgent a mother , the question could not give offence .
He undertakes it ;" ( looking towards Captain Wentworth ,) " he is writing about it now ."
" But , my dear papa , you are no friend to matrimony ; and therefore why should you be so anxious to pay your respects to a _bride_ ?
Charles joins me in love , and everything proper .
For half an hour Mr . Weston was surprized and sorry ; but then he began to perceive that Frank ' s coming two or three months later would be a much better plan ; better time of year ; better weather ; and that he would be able , without any doubt , to stay considerably longer with them than if he had come sooner .
She had died the preceding summer while he was at sea .
" Oh !
" No ,"-- replied Emma -- quite confirmed by the depressed manner in which he still spoke --" I should like to take another turn .
Her sensibilities , I suspect , are strong -- and her temper excellent in its power of forbearance , patience , self - controul ; but it wants openness .
Your sister is an amiable creature ; but yours is the character of decision and firmness , I see .
Anne was considering whether she should venture to suggest that a gown , or a cap , would not be liable to any such misuse , when a knock at the door suspended everything .
In that , if in any thing , we may find an explanation ."
beyond anything great !
The two other gentlemen waited at the door to let her pass .
--
I do not care if it IS the Doctor ' s favourite colour .
Call upon her , by all means ."
" You are very right ; it has been thought of .
Twice every year these annuities were to be paid ; and then there was the trouble of getting it to them ; and then one of them was said to have died , and afterwards it turned out to be no such thing .
" Hunters !"
Lady Dalrymple and Miss Carteret -- they would soon be innoxious cousins to her .
In seasons of cheerfulness , no temper could be more cheerful than hers , or possess , in a greater degree , that sanguine expectation of happiness which is happiness itself .
Every attention is due to Mr Elliot .
And the lock of hair -- that too I had always carried about me in the same pocket - book , which was now searched by Madam with the most ingratiating virulence ,-- the dear lock -- all , every memento was torn from me ."
He was confused , seemed scarcely sensible of pleasure in seeing them , looked neither rapturous nor gay , said little but what was forced from him by questions , and distinguished Elinor by no mark of affection .
" He would be a very lucky man , Shepherd ," replied Sir Walter ; " that ' s all I have to remark .
It was a private resolution of hers , not communicated to him -- or at least not communicated in a way to carry conviction .-- Till yesterday , I know he said he was in the dark as to her plans .
Mrs . Ferrars was the most unfortunate of women -- poor Fanny had suffered agonies of sensibility -- and he considered the existence of each , under such a blow , with grateful wonder .
Elinor was not prepared for such a question , and having no answer ready , was obliged to adopt the simple and common expedient , of asking what he meant ?
The good was all to myself , by making you an object of the tenderest affection to me .
I must get on to Kingston as fast as I can ."
Nursing does not belong to a man ; it is not his province .
" But , my dear , pray do not make any more matches ; they are silly things , and break up one ' s family circle grievously ."
I thought it had been only a joke , but so serious a question seems to imply more ; and I must beg , therefore , that you will not deceive yourself any longer .
" No , my dear , I never encouraged any body to marry , but I would always wish to pay every proper attention to a lady -- and a bride , especially , is never to be neglected .
Mr . Woodhouse was rather agitated by such harsh reflections on his friend Perry , to whom he had , in fact , though unconsciously , been attributing many of his own feelings and expressions ;-- but the soothing attentions of his daughters gradually removed the present evil , and the immediate alertness of one brother , and better recollections of the other , prevented any renewal of it .
And we will make the dear little love some amends for her disappointment to - morrow , and then I hope she will not much mind it ."
They hurried on , and were speedily at Randalls .--" Well , my dear ," said he , as they entered the room --" I have brought her , and now I hope you will soon be better .
madness , if it is so ; but I hope you are mistaken ."
" Or that he did not give her the use of their own instrument -- which must now be shut up in London , untouched by any body ."
Dare not say that man forgets sooner than woman , that his love has an earlier death .
" Poor soul !"
pray , Miss Margaret , let us know all about it ," said Mrs . Jennings .
CHAPTER 16
Mary had been hysterical again this morning .
Let me recommend Mr Elliot .
" Is Mr . Edward Ferrars ," said Elinor , with resolution , " going to be married ?"
As long as they lived , no exertions would be necessary , their home might be hers for ever ; and for their own comfort they would have retained her wholly ; but this would be selfishness :-- what must be at last , had better be soon .
he is ruined for ever .
he has been dead these eight years and better .
she offered to forgive the past , if I would marry Eliza .
Weston , tell me at once .-- Something has happened in Brunswick Square .
" I lay it down as a general rule , Harriet , that if a woman _doubts_ as to whether she should accept a man or not , she certainly ought to refuse him .
I shut my eyes , and would not understand you , or do you justice .
And even now , I cannot comprehend on what motive she acted , or what fancied advantage it could be to her , to be fettered to a man for whom she had not the smallest regard , and who had only two thousand pounds in the world .
They were both silent : Mrs Smith very thoughtful .
She had gone to her letters , and found it all as she supposed ; and the re - perusal of these letters , after so long an interval , her poor son gone for ever , and all the strength of his faults forgotten , had affected her spirits exceedingly , and thrown her into greater grief for him than she had know on first hearing of his death .
Read it in comfort to yourself .
One half of the world cannot understand the pleasures of the other ."
Henrietta fully thought so herself , before Captain Wentworth came ; but from that time Cousin Charles had been very much forgotten .
The husband had not been what he ought , and the wife had been led among that part of mankind which made her think worse of the world than she hoped it deserved .
The party separated .
They are but too apt to give up music ."
It soon flies over the present failure , and begins to hope again .
I sent him away with smiles .
The conversation was here interrupted .
We do not often look upon fine young men , well - bred and agreeable .
I never wish to offend , but I am so foolishly shy , that I often seem negligent , when I am only kept back by my natural awkwardness .
Oh !
Mrs . Dashwood ' s and Elinor ' s appetites were equally lost , and Margaret might think herself very well off , that with so much uneasiness as both her sisters had lately experienced , so much reason as they had often had to be careless of their meals , she had never been obliged to go without her dinner before .
From a reverie of this kind , as she sat at her drawing - table , she was roused one morning , soon after Edward ' s leaving them , by the arrival of company .
They will have their barouche - landau , of course , which holds four perfectly ; and therefore , without saying any thing of _our_ carriage , we should be able to explore the different beauties extremely well .
And as for Mrs . Hodges , Wright holds her very cheap indeed .-- She promised Wright a receipt , and never sent it ."
said I , ` I shall not forestall Jane ; I left her dancing with Mr . George Otway ; she will love to tell you all about it herself to - morrow : her first partner was Mr . Elton , I do not know who will ask her next , perhaps Mr . William Cox .'
I could not bring it into play ; it was overwhelmed , buried , lost in those earlier feelings which I had been smarting under year after year .
Admiral Croft ' s manners were not quite of the tone to suit Lady Russell , but they delighted Anne .
" I am much obliged to you ," was her answer , " but I am not going with them .
Patty makes an excellent apple - dumpling .
Shall I take any message ?"
" And no great harm if it does ," said Mr . Woodhouse .
They are known to no human being , I guess , but herself .
she found something else must be done .
" Certainly , if you wish it ;-- but you are not going to walk to Highbury alone ?"
Every body is lazy !
But it would not do ; he had not come to the point .
I dare say we shall have nothing to distress us .
" Very ."
your manner might be only the ease which your engagement to another man would give .
" Can you , indeed !"
-- If he would say so to her at once , in the tone of decision becoming a man , there would be no opposition made to his going ."
She shewed it to me .
He must have had a wet ride .-- Yes .-- He meant to walk with her , she found .
Anne recollected with pleasure the next morning her promise of going to Mrs Smith , meaning that it should engage her from home at the time when Mr Elliot would be most likely to call ; for to avoid Mr Elliot was almost a first object .
There was so much of friendliness , and of flattery , and of everything most bewitching in his reception there ; the old were so hospitable , the young so agreeable , that he could not but resolve to remain where he was , and take all the charms and perfections of Edward ' s wife upon credit a little longer .
The party was divided and disposed of on two contiguous benches : Anne was among those on the foremost , and Mr Elliot had manoeuvred so well , with the assistance of his friend Colonel Wallis , as to have a seat by her .
Unintentionally she returned to that part of the room ; he saw her , and , instantly rising , said , with studied politeness --
Harriet was too much agitated to encounter him .
Gratifying , however , and stimulative as was the letter in the material part , its sentiments , she yet found , when it was folded up and returned to Mrs . Weston , that it had not added any lasting warmth , that she could still do without the writer , and that he must learn to do without her .
The wind blows through one of the cupboards just in the same way ."
Nothing can be farther from pleasure than to be dancing in a crowd -- and a crowd in a little room !"
Most earnestly did she wish that he might not be too nice , or too observant if Elizabeth were his object ; and that Elizabeth was disposed to believe herself so , and that her friend Mrs Clay was encouraging the idea , seemed apparent by a glance or two between them , while Mr Elliot ' s frequent visits were talked of .
Dixon is very musical , is he ?
" Which makes his good manners the more valuable .
He considered the blessing of beauty as inferior only to the blessing of a baronetcy ; and the Sir Walter Elliot , who united these gifts , was the constant object of his warmest respect and devotion .
But with all the hopes of cheerfulness , and all the present comfort of delay , there was still such an evil hanging over her in the hour of explanation with Harriet , as made it impossible for Emma to be ever perfectly at ease .
Winthrop , however , or its environs -- for young men are , sometimes to be met with , strolling about near home -- was their destination ; and after another half mile of gradual ascent through large enclosures , where the ploughs at work , and the fresh made path spoke the farmer counteracting the sweets of poetical despondence , and meaning to have spring again , they gained the summit of the most considerable hill , which parted Uppercross and Winthrop , and soon commanded a full view of the latter , at the foot of the hill on the other side .
Harriet exactly .
" Yes ; my father is to join me here : we shall walk back together , and I must be off immediately .
Yes , that will be quite enough for pleasure .
" Upon my word , my dear , I do not know , for I never heard the subject talked of ."
" But , my dear child , the time is drawing near ; here is April , and June , or say even July , is very near , with such business to accomplish before us .
I am sure she would rather not come ; she cannot feel easy with us .
I must put on a few ornaments now , because it is expected of me .
" I do think it is , without exception , the best charade I ever read ."
Elinor wished that the same forbearance could have extended towards herself , but that was impossible , and she was obliged to listen day after day to the indignation of them all .
Harriet was soon back again , and the proposal almost immediately made ; and she had no scruples which could stand many minutes against the earnest pressing of both the others .
Long before he reappeared , attending the short , neat , brisk - moving aunt , and her elegant niece ,-- Mrs . Weston , like a sweet - tempered woman and a good wife , had examined the passage again , and found the evils of it much less than she had supposed before -- indeed very trifling ; and here ended the difficulties of decision .
Have you heard the news ?
A very few days brought the party from London , and she had no sooner an opportunity of being one hour alone with Harriet , than she became perfectly satisfied -- unaccountable as it was !-- that Robert Martin had thoroughly supplanted Mr . Knightley , and was now forming all her views of happiness .
" Well , Miss Woodhouse ," he almost immediately began , " your inclination for dancing has not been quite frightened away , I hope , by the terrors of my father ' s little rooms .
" Well , I have so little confidence in my own judgment , that whenever I marry , I hope some body will chuse my wife for me .
" Indeed I believe you ," replied Elinor ; " but I am very sure that Colonel Brandon has not the smallest wish of marrying ME ."
" Ay , a very bad business indeed .
I perfectly understand your situation , however , Miss Woodhouse -- ( looking towards Mr . Woodhouse ), Your father ' s state of health must be a great drawback .
and it may be a very fortunate circumstance for him , for Frank , I mean , that he should have attached himself to a girl of such steadiness of character and good judgment as I have always given her credit for -- and still am disposed to give her credit for , in spite of this one great deviation from the strict rule of right .
He distrusts his own judgment in such matters so much , that he is always unwilling to give his opinion on any picture ; but he has an innate propriety and simplicity of taste , which in general direct him perfectly right ."
The lady could not but yield to such joint entreaties , and promise to stay .
Very true .
Such conduct made them of course most exceedingly laughed at ; but ridicule could not shame , and seemed hardly to provoke them .
By remaining in the neighbourhood , I am become inured to it ."
" And there will be the two Gilberts , young Cox , my father , and myself , besides Mr . Knightley .
There are places in town , offices , where inquiry would soon produce something -- Offices for the sale -- not quite of human flesh -- but of human intellect ."
Harriet was on the point of leaving the room , and only stopt to say , with a very interesting naivete ,
Her father and Lady Dalrymple were speaking .
She seemed to propose shewing no agitation , or disappointment , or peculiar concern in the discovery .
You will not see him .
Let us have patience .
And , in short , from knowing his usual ways , I am very much inclined to think that it was for their accommodation the carriage was used at all .
Then followed the history and rise of the ancient and respectable family , in the usual terms ; how it had been first settled in Cheshire ; how mentioned in Dugdale , serving the office of high sheriff , representing a borough in three successive parliaments , exertions of loyalty , and dignity of baronet , in the first year of Charles II , with all the Marys and Elizabeths they had married ; forming altogether two handsome duodecimo pages , and concluding with the arms and motto :--" Principal seat , Kellynch Hall , in the county of Somerset ," and Sir Walter ' s handwriting again in this finale :--
He said so repeatedly ; other things he said too , which marked the turn of his feelings and gave the lie to his actions .
Mr . Weston meanwhile , perfectly unsuspicious of the indignation he was exciting , happy and cheerful as usual , and with all the right of being principal talker , which a day spent anywhere from home confers , was making himself agreeable among the rest ; and having satisfied the inquiries of his wife as to his dinner , convincing her that none of all her careful directions to the servants had been forgotten , and spread abroad what public news he had heard , was proceeding to a family communication , which , though principally addressed to Mrs . Weston , he had not the smallest doubt of being highly interesting to every body in the room .
" Nay , why do you ?"
Very long has it possessed a charm over my fancy ; and , if I dared , I would breathe my wishes that the name might never change ."
Harriet ' s cheerful look and manner established hers : she came back , not to think of Mr . Martin , but to talk of Mr . Elton .
" As vile a spot as I ever saw in my life ," said Mr . Palmer .
This was the only visit from Frank Churchill in the course of ten days .
" I have perhaps given her a little more decision of character , have taught her to think on points which had not fallen in her way before ."
" It is a very simple story .
His father had no apprehension of it .
The sequel explained it .
Before her removing from Norland , Elinor had painted a very pretty pair of screens for her sister - in - law , which being now just mounted and brought home , ornamented her present drawing room ; and these screens , catching the eye of John Dashwood on his following the other gentlemen into the room , were officiously handed by him to Colonel Brandon for his admiration .
I will not open the window here ; it would give you all cold ; but I can go into my mother ' s room you know .
We shall miss her ; but SHE will be happy ."
They are both delightful women , indeed !-- I wonder I should never hear you say how agreeable Mrs . Dashwood was !"
" The navy , I think , who have done so much for us , have at least an equal claim with any other set of men , for all the comforts and all the privileges which any home can give .
Mrs . Dashwood now took pains to get acquainted with him .
Anne was caught .
Donavan says there is nothing materially to be apprehended ; her constitution is a good one , and her resolution equal to any thing .
Having alluded to " an accident ," he must hear the whole .
Her good - nature , too , is not so very slight a claim , comprehending , as it does , real , thorough sweetness of temper and manner , a very humble opinion of herself , and a great readiness to be pleased with other people .
In the meanwhile , she resolved against seeing Harriet .-- It would do neither of them good , it would do the subject no good , to be talking of it farther .-- She was resolved not to be convinced , as long as she could doubt , and yet had no authority for opposing Harriet ' s confidence .
" Yes .
She still intended him for her friend .
He could be no judge , however , of the evil he was holding cheap .
He had business at the Crown about his hay , and a great many errands for Mrs . Weston at Ford ' s , but he need not hurry any body else ."
The loss of the ball -- the loss of the young man -- and all that the young man might be feeling !-- It was too wretched !-- Such a delightful evening as it would have been !-- Every body so happy !
Anne had never seen her father and sister before in contact with nobility , and she must acknowledge herself disappointed .
I am almost sure it is , for I saw him cut it off .
Mrs Croft was attending with great good - humour , and whenever she spoke at all , it was very sensibly .
After Emma had talked about it for ten minutes , Mr . Woodhouse felt no unwillingness , and only made the usual stipulation of not sitting at the bottom of the table himself , with the usual regular difficulty of deciding who should do it for him .
There was little sympathy to be spared for any body else .
What is her age ?
Prescriptions poured in from all quarters , and as usual , were all declined .
" Now , how would she speak of him ?"
CHAPTER 6
You were all gone I do not know where .
At another time Emma might have been amused , but she was too much astonished now at Mr . Elton ' s spirits for other feelings .
It is not in the smallest degree connected with any human being of the name of Knightley ."
It was her own universal good - will and contented temper which worked such wonders .
The revolution which one instant had made in Anne , was almost beyond expression .
Oh !
" Nay , Edward ," said Marianne , " you need not reproach me .
" Yes ; once , while she was staying in this house , I happened to drop in for ten minutes ; and I saw quite enough of her .
She wanted , rather , to be quiet , and out of temptation ; but still , as it was desirable that she should appear , in general , like her usual self , she took care to express as much interest in the circumstance , and enter as warmly into Mr . and Mrs . Weston ' s disappointment , as might naturally belong to their friendship .
I cannot at all consent to Mr . Knightley ' s marrying ; and I am sure it is not at all likely .
" Another thing must be taken into consideration too -- Mrs . Elton does not talk _to_ Miss Fairfax as she speaks _of_ her .
How Charles could take such a thing into his head was always incomprehensible to me .
But Elinor had no such dependence ; for since Edward would still be unable to marry Miss Morton , and his chusing herself had been spoken of in Mrs . Ferrars ' s flattering language as only a lesser evil than his chusing Lucy Steele , she feared that Robert ' s offence would serve no other purpose than to enrich Fanny .
Harriet smiled again , and her smiles grew stronger .
Have not I some right to complain ?
A party was formed this evening for going on the following day to see a very fine place about twelve miles from Barton , belonging to a brother - in - law of Colonel Brandon , without whose interest it could not be seen , as the proprietor , who was then abroad , had left strict orders on that head .
" Me !"
I WILL be calm ; I WILL be mistress of myself ."
Remember it ?
Whoever suffered inconvenience , she must suffer none , but it occupied a little time to settle the point of civility between the other two .
I do not recommend matrimony at present to Emma , though I mean no slight to the state , I assure you ."
Have you forgot that we are engaged to Camden Place to - morrow night ?
They had music ; Emma was obliged to play ; and the thanks and praise which necessarily followed appeared to her an affectation of candour , an air of greatness , meaning only to shew off in higher style her own very superior performance .
The simplicity and cheerfulness of her nature , her contented and grateful spirit , were a recommendation to every body , and a mine of felicity to herself .
" I declare , I do not know when I have heard any thing that has given me more satisfaction !-- It always has quite hurt me that Jane Fairfax , who plays so delightfully , should not have an instrument .
It had been begun several days back .
The list she drew up when only fourteen -- I remember thinking it did her judgment so much credit , that I preserved it some time ; and I dare say she may have made out a very good list now .
" She always declares she will never marry , which , of course , means just nothing at all .
I will bring friends with me ."
Mr . Ferrars is to be the man .
said she : " did you ever sit for your picture ?"
As for the navy , it had fashion on its side , but I was too old when the subject was first started to enter it -- and , at length , as there was no necessity for my having any profession at all , as I might be as dashing and expensive without a red coat on my back as with one , idleness was pronounced on the whole to be most advantageous and honourable , and a young man of eighteen is not in general so earnestly bent on being busy as to resist the solicitations of his friends to do nothing .
Beyond the entrance of the valley , where the country , though still rich , was less wild and more open , a long stretch of the road which they had travelled on first coming to Barton , lay before them ; and on reaching that point , they stopped to look around them , and examine a prospect which formed the distance of their view from the cottage , from a spot which they had never happened to reach in any of their walks before .
" Yes ," said Mrs Smith more doubtingly , " sometimes it may , though I fear its lessons are not often in the elevated style you describe .
Mr . Weston was following ; but Mrs . Elton detained him , to gratify him by her opinion of his son ; and so briskly did she begin , that the young man himself , though by no means moving slowly , could hardly be out of hearing .
I have not the least idea of his being a weak young man : I feel sure that he is not .
I had a letter from him this morning , and he will be with us within a fortnight ."
But the correctness of his eye , and the delicacy of his taste , proved to be beyond his politeness .
Impatient in this situation to be doing something that might lead to her sister ' s relief , Elinor resolved to write the next morning to her mother , and hoped by awakening her fears for the health of Marianne , to procure those inquiries which had been so long delayed ; and she was still more eagerly bent on this measure by perceiving after breakfast on the morrow , that Marianne was again writing to Willoughby , for she could not suppose it to be to any other person .
He promised to call again in the course of three or four hours , and left both the patient and her anxious attendant more composed than he had found them .
" I cannot afford to lose ONE hour ."
" Who is Colonel Brandon ?
The plan of a drain , the change of a fence , the felling of a tree , and the destination of every acre for wheat , turnips , or spring corn , was entered into with as much equality of interest by John , as his cooler manners rendered possible ; and if his willing brother ever left him any thing to inquire about , his inquiries even approached a tone of eagerness .
poor woman , who would have thought it !"
To Miss --
I am sure you will like them ; indeed , you DO like them , you know , very much already , and so does my mother ; and they are such favourites with Harry !"
She then repeated some warm personal praise which she had drawn from Mr . Elton , and now did full justice to ; and Harriet blushed and smiled , and said she had always thought Mr . Elton very agreeable .
I am thwarted in every thing material .
But this , no doubt , you have been always doing .
A mind like hers , once opening to suspicion , made rapid progress .
If _we_ exert ourselves , I think we shall not be long in want of allies .
They got on fast .
Lucy bit her lip , and looked angrily at her sister .
He had ridden home through the rain ; and had walked up directly after dinner , to see how this sweetest and best of all creatures , faultless in spite of all her faults , bore the discovery .
He had an affectionate heart .
We must bring her forward .
I never knew him myself ; I only heard of him ; but there was a something in his conduct then , with regard to my father and sister , and afterwards in the circumstances of his marriage , which I never could quite reconcile with present times .
Of breakfast she had been kept by her fears , and of dinner by their sudden reverse , from eating much ;-- and the present refreshment , therefore , with such feelings of content as she brought to it , was particularly welcome .
When he was present she had no eyes for any one else .
said she , beginning again when they were all in the street .
She had been a friend and companion such as few possessed : intelligent , well - informed , useful , gentle , knowing all the ways of the family , interested in all its concerns , and peculiarly interested in herself , in every pleasure , every scheme of hers -- one to whom she could speak every thought as it arose , and who had such an affection for her as could never find fault .
Here Anne had often been staying .
She spent whole hours at the pianoforte alternately singing and crying ; her voice often totally suspended by her tears .
What can be the meaning of it ?
He is as well acquainted with his own claims , as you can be with Harriet ' s .
Their claims to the notice of Mrs . John Dashwood , as the nieces of the gentleman who for many years had had the care of her brother , might not have done much , however , towards procuring them seats at her table ; but as Lady Middleton ' s guests they must be welcome ; and Lucy , who had long wanted to be personally known to the family , to have a nearer view of their characters and her own difficulties , and to have an opportunity of endeavouring to please them , had seldom been happier in her life , than she was on receiving Mrs . John Dashwood ' s card .
Their preparations , however , were stopped short .
There were many other men about him , many groups walking the same way , but there was no mistaking him .
I will not say quite all .
Upon the hint of having spoken disrespectfully or carelessly of the family and the family honours , he was quite indignant .
I knew the name , the place , I knew all about it , and instantly saw what she had been doing .
We had better leave the Crofts to find their own level .
and I desire you will never insult me with my second W . again , meaning , for the rest of my life , to be only yours truly ,-- Wm .
If the talking aunt had taken me quite by surprize , it must have been the death of me .
But what was that , when such friends were to be met ?"
She now felt a great inclination to go to the outer door ; she wanted to see if it rained .
I always thought it such a sweet place , ma ' am !
" Well , Mrs . Weston ," said Emma triumphantly when he left them , " what do you say now to Mr . Knightley ' s marrying Jane Fairfax ?"
She spoke with a confidence which staggered , with a satisfaction which silenced , Mr . Knightley .
there is no end of the sad consequences of your going to South End .
A woman is not to marry a man merely because she is asked , or because he is attached to her , and can write a tolerable letter ."
His kindness was not confined to words ; for within an hour after he left them , a large basket full of garden stuff and fruit arrived from the park , which was followed before the end of the day by a present of game .
Oh !
Sir John ' s confidence in his own judgment rose with this animated praise , and he set off directly for the cottage to tell the Miss Dashwoods of the Miss Steeles ' arrival , and to assure them of their being the sweetest girls in the world .
Her mother too , in whose mind not one speculative thought of their marriage had been raised , by his prospect of riches , was led before the end of a week to hope and expect it ; and secretly to congratulate herself on having gained two such sons - in - law as Edward and Willoughby .
" I am going into the village to see my horses ," said be , " as you are not yet ready for breakfast ; I shall be back again presently ."
" I am glad ," said Lady Middleton to Lucy , " you are not going to finish poor little Annamaria ' s basket this evening ; for I am sure it must hurt your eyes to work filigree by candlelight .
" A dance !"
Mrs Smith hesitated a little here .
" Here comes Marianne ," cried Sir John .
Exactly so , indeed -- quite unheard of -- but some ladies say any thing .
As to his going , it was inevitable .
But the day did not close so auspiciously as it began .-- Towards the evening Marianne became ill again , growing more heavy , restless , and uncomfortable than before .
regular features , open countenance , with a complexion !
" Very true ," he gravely replied ; " it was very bad ."
She hoped to be wise and reasonable in time ; but alas !
I think it would be much better if they would come in one afternoon next summer , and take their tea with us -- take us in their afternoon walk ; which they might do , as our hours are so reasonable , and yet get home without being out in the damp of the evening .
Perhaps they began to feel it might have been kinder and wiser to have resisted the temptation of any delay , and spared her from a taste of such enjoyments of ease and leisure as must now be relinquished .
And that is all that I can recollect of it -- but it is very clever all the way through .
" It was not inclination that he wanted , Elinor ; I could plainly see THAT .
Surely , after doing so , she cannot be imagined liable to any impression of sorrow or of joy on his account -- she cannot be interested in any thing that befalls him .-- She would not be so weak as to throw away the comfort of a child , and yet retain the anxiety of a parent !"
Mr . Elton ' s rights , however , gradually revived .
I am sure I have not got one half so good ."
The word curricle made Charles Musgrove jump up that he might compare it with his own ; the servant in mourning roused Anne ' s curiosity , and the whole six were collected to look , by the time the owner of the curricle was to be seen issuing from the door amidst the bows and civilities of the household , and taking his seat , to drive off .
There they exchanged again those feelings and those promises which had once before seemed to secure everything , but which had been followed by so many , many years of division and estrangement .
It would be such a delight to have her picture !"
The thing is determined , that is ( laughing affectedly ) as far as I can presume to determine any thing without the concurrence of my lord and master .
Mr . Churchill , independent of his wife , was feared by nobody ; an easy , guidable man , to be persuaded into any thing by his nephew .
No rumour of Lucy ' s marriage had yet reached him :-- he knew nothing of what had passed ; and the first hours of his visit were consequently spent in hearing and in wondering .
Is not this room rich in specimens of your landscapes and flowers ; and has not Mrs . Weston some inimitable figure - pieces in her drawing - room , at Randalls ?"
Come , and tell me .
I have no notion of men ' s going on in this way ; and if ever I meet him again , I will give him such a dressing as he has not had this many a day .
" It may be so ; but Willoughby is capable -- at least I think "-- he stopped a moment ; then added in a voice which seemed to distrust itself , " And your sister -- how did she --"
Such violence of affliction indeed could not be supported for ever ; it sunk within a few days into a calmer melancholy ; but these employments , to which she daily recurred , her solitary walks and silent meditations , still produced occasional effusions of sorrow as lively as ever .
You must answer it of course -- and speedily ."
Dixon in them ."
And besides the operation of this , as a general principle , you may be sure that Miss Fairfax awes Mrs . Elton by her superiority both of mind and manner ; and that , face to face , Mrs . Elton treats her with all the respect which she has a claim to .
I knew it was -- but had not resolution enough to part with them ."
So far it was decided ; and Henrietta at first declared the same .
As to the management of their children , his theory was much better than his wife ' s , and his practice not so bad .
This nut ," he continued , with playful solemnity , " while so many of his brethren have fallen and been trodden under foot , is still in possession of all the happiness that a hazel nut can be supposed capable of ."
Dixon !"
Her father composed himself to sleep after dinner , as usual , and she had then only to sit and think of what she had lost .
It must be done directly ; it must be done in London ; the order must go through the hands of some intelligent person whose taste could be depended on ; and Isabella , the usual doer of all commissions , must not be applied to , because it was December , and Mr . Woodhouse could not bear the idea of her stirring out of her house in the fogs of December .
The visit afforded her many pleasant recollections the next day ; and all that she might be supposed to have lost on the side of dignified seclusion , must be amply repaid in the splendour of popularity .
But so it ought to be ; they are people of large fortune , they are related to you , and every civility and accommodation that can serve to make your situation pleasant might be reasonably expected .
The merest awkward country girl , without style , or elegance , and almost without beauty .-- I remember her perfectly .
But why should you dislike him ?"
are my ideas so scanty ?
It had a most favourable aspect ; and , for half a minute , Emma felt the glory of having schemed successfully .
Find some body for me .
It seemed an unnecessary caution ; Jane was wanting to give her words , not to Mrs . Elton , but to Miss Woodhouse , as the latter plainly saw .
You will see nothing of it by candlelight .
" Yes , I do .
I have not had so many opportunities of estimating the minuter propensities of his mind , his inclinations and tastes , as you have ; but I have the highest opinion in the world of his goodness and sense .
It was a dreadful picture of ingratitude and inhumanity ; and Anne felt , at some moments , that no flagrant open crime could have been worse .
Miss Woodhouse , I hope nothing may happen to prevent the ball .
His extreme attention to my mother -- wanting her to sit in the vicarage pew , that she might hear the better , for my mother is a little deaf , you know -- it is not much , but she does not hear quite quick .
When he is married , if we have the good luck to live to another war , we shall see him do as you and I , and a great many others , have done .
Harriet ' s features are very delicate , which makes a likeness difficult ; and yet there is a peculiarity in the shape of the eye and the lines about the mouth which one ought to catch ."
He walked by her side .
Mrs . Elton turned to Mrs . Weston .
Now , however , I see nothing in it but a very natural and consistent degree of discretion .
Emma is spoiled by being the cleverest of her family .
" You are never like me , dear Elinor , or I should wonder at your composure now .
In one respect Mrs . Elton grew even worse than she had appeared at first .
And there would be poor Emma in the carriage behind .
cried Mrs . Jennings .
" Take a little time , consider , do not commit yourself ."
Elinor felt all the reasonableness of the idea , and it gave fresh misery to her reflections .
" I shall not scold you .
" I feel no sentiment of approbation inferior to love ."
said Mrs . Weston in a trembling voice .
I do not know whether you have ever happened to see any of her performances before , but she is in general reckoned to draw extremely well ."
It was through a series of strange blunders !"
She brought no name , no blood , no alliance .
In books too , as well as in music , she courted the misery which a contrast between the past and present was certain of giving .
Now , however , it was absolutely to be ; every preparation was resumed , and very soon after the Churchills had removed to Richmond , a few lines from Frank , to say that his aunt felt already much better for the change , and that he had no doubt of being able to join them for twenty - four hours at any given time , induced them to name as early a day as possible .
Mrs . Ferrars at first reasonably endeavoured to dissuade him from marrying Miss Dashwood , by every argument in her power ;-- told him , that in Miss Morton he would have a woman of higher rank and larger fortune ;-- and enforced the assertion , by observing that Miss Morton was the daughter of a nobleman with thirty thousand pounds , while Miss Dashwood was only the daughter of a private gentleman with no more than THREE ; but when she found that , though perfectly admitting the truth of her representation , he was by no means inclined to be guided by it , she judged it wisest , from the experience of the past , to submit -- and therefore , after such an ungracious delay as she owed to her own dignity , and as served to prevent every suspicion of good - will , she issued her decree of consent to the marriage of Edward and Elinor .
How the trampers might have behaved , had the young ladies been more courageous , must be doubtful ; but such an invitation for attack could not be resisted ; and Harriet was soon assailed by half a dozen children , headed by a stout woman and a great boy , all clamorous , and impertinent in look , though not absolutely in word .-- More and more frightened , she immediately promised them money , and taking out her purse , gave them a shilling , and begged them not to want more , or to use her ill .-- She was then able to walk , though but slowly , and was moving away -- but her terror and her purse were too tempting , and she was followed , or rather surrounded , by the whole gang , demanding more .
But the feelings of the past could not be recalled .-- Nothing could restore him with a faith unbroken -- a character unblemished , to Marianne .
" Do you know Mr . Robert Ferrars ?"
She had before conjectured him to be a stranger like themselves , and determined that a well - looking groom , who was strolling about near the two inns as they came back , should be his servant .
She would see if it rained .
Too much indebted to the event for his acquittal .-- No judge of his own manners by you .-- Always deceived in fact by his own wishes , and regardless of little besides his own convenience .-- Fancying you to have fathomed his secret .
She had scarcely a stronger regret than for her past coldness ; and the person , whom she had been so many months neglecting , was now the very one on whom she would have lavished every distinction of regard or sympathy .
I always pity them when they do ; they seem to take it so much to heart ."
He was on foot , and after looking very respectfully at her , looked with most unfeigned satisfaction at her companion .
She saw her mother and Marianne change colour ; saw them look at herself , and whisper a few sentences to each other .
Elinor could not NOW be made unhappy by this behaviour .-- A few months ago it would have hurt her exceedingly ; but it was not in Mrs . Ferrars ' power to distress her by it now ;-- and the difference of her manners to the Miss Steeles , a difference which seemed purposely made to humble her more , only amused her .
" Many , many circumstances ," said Elinor , solemnly .
I suppose you have not so many in this part of the world ; for my part , I think they are a vast addition always ."
He looked at her with a smile , and a little motion of the head , which expressed , " Come to me , I have something to say ;" and the unaffected , easy kindness of manner which denoted the feelings of an older acquaintance than he really was , strongly enforced the invitation .
They were always perfectly agreed in the want of more money , and a strong inclination for a handsome present from his father ; but here , as on most topics , he had the superiority , for while Mary thought it a great shame that such a present was not made , he always contended for his father ' s having many other uses for his money , and a right to spend it as he liked .
This moment , if you please .
He would soon be among them again ; Mr . Elton and his bride .
" You were not formerly , I know .
But this was not judged feasible .
Who could have seen through such thick - headed nonsense ?
Lucy was silenced .
She concluded with a very kind invitation to Mr . and Mrs . John Dashwood to visit her at Barton ; and to Edward she gave one with still greater affection .
" My dear ma ' am ," said Elinor , " what can you be thinking of ?-- Why , Colonel Brandon ' s only object is to be of use to Mr .
Emma was almost ready to sink under the agitation of this moment .
From a reverie of this kind she was recalled at the end of some minutes by Willoughby , who , rousing himself from a reverie at least equally painful , started up in preparation for going , and said --
" But indeed you must and shall come .
" I must not dwell upon it ," said she .--" I must not think of it .
hardly could I believe the melancholy and sickly figure before me , to be the remains of the lovely , blooming , healthful girl , on whom I had once doted .
" Oh no , no !
And just then I could not hear any more , for my cousin called from below to tell me Mrs . Richardson was come in her coach , and would take one of us to Kensington Gardens ; so I was forced to go into the room and interrupt them , to ask Lucy if she would like to go , but she did not care to leave Edward ; so I just run up stairs and put on a pair of silk stockings and came off with the Richardsons ."
The expense would be nothing , the inconvenience not more ; and it was altogether an attention which the delicacy of his conscience pointed out to be requisite to its complete enfranchisement from his promise to his father .
He did justice to his very gentlemanlike appearance , his air of elegance and fashion , his good shaped face , his sensible eye ; but , at the same time , " must lament his being very much under - hung , a defect which time seemed to have increased ; nor could he pretend to say that ten years had not altered almost every feature for the worse .
But I had just settled within myself to ask the Miss Steeles to spend a few days with us .
Jane ' s curiosity did not appear of that absorbing nature as wholly to occupy her .
" No great variety of faces for you ," said Emma .
And _she_ appears so truly good -- there is something so motherly and kind - hearted about her , that it wins upon one directly .
The appearance of the servants looking out for them to give notice of the carriages was a joyful sight ; and even the bustle of collecting and preparing to depart , and the solicitude of Mrs . Elton to have _her_ carriage first , were gladly endured , in the prospect of the quiet drive home which was to close the very questionable enjoyments of this day of pleasure .
" You will wonder ," said she , " what has been fixing my eye so long ; but I was looking after some window - curtains , which Lady Alicia and Mrs Frankland were telling me of last night .
Though uncertain that any one were to blame , she found fault with every absent friend .
my dear , we cannot begin too early ; you are not aware of the difficulty of procuring exactly the desirable thing ."
Elinor heard all this with attention and surprise .
" I know it -- I know it ," cried her mother .
" You must feel it very fortunate that Miss Fairfax should be allowed to come to you at such a time .
She went on , however .
I Always take the part of my own sex .
" Ah !
you will be glad of a little company to sit with you .
" How strange !"
But I am determined to set for it the very first opportunity ."
Well , time does fly indeed !-- and my memory is very bad .
And it is not merely the house -- the grounds , I assure you , as far as I could observe , are strikingly like .
" Oh that they would !"
But why should not I wear pink ribbons ?
She hesitated ; she knew not what to do .
" I have not seen Mr Elliot these three years ," was Mrs Smith ' s answer , given so gravely that it was impossible to pursue the subject farther ; and Anne felt that she had gained nothing but an increase of curiosity .
" Impropriety !
" What can you have to do in town at this time of year ?"
His society became gradually her most exquisite enjoyment .
I have never told you how this was brought on .
-- But , in spite of these deficiencies , the wishes , the hopes , the confidence , the predictions of the small band of true friends who witnessed the ceremony , were fully answered in the perfect happiness of the union .
It was the desire of appearing superior to other people .
So says my historian , at least .
" He had seen a group of old acquaintance in the street as he passed -- he had not stopped , he would not stop for more than a word -- but he had the vanity to think they would be disappointed if he did not call , and much as he wished to stay longer at Hartfield , he must hurry off ."
While she was gone , Mr . Knightley called , and sat some time with Mr . Woodhouse and Emma , till Mr . Woodhouse , who had previously made up his mind to walk out , was persuaded by his daughter not to defer it , and was induced by the entreaties of both , though against the scruples of his own civility , to leave Mr . Knightley for that purpose .
Happy to find that she was not suspected of any extraordinary interest in it ; that Mrs . Jennings ( as she had of late often hoped might be the case ) had ceased to imagine her at all attached to Edward ; and happy above all the rest , in the absence of Marianne , she felt very well able to speak of the affair without embarrassment , and to give her judgment , as she believed , with impartiality on the conduct of every one concerned in it .
" No ," replied Anne , " nor next week , nor next , nor next .
Depend upon me for taking care that no tenant has more than his just rights .
Their departure took place in the first week in January .
Doubtless it was so , and she could take no revenge , for he was not altered , or not for the worse .
They are ripening fast ."
He was gone ; he had disappeared , she felt a moment ' s regret .
I always look upon her as able to persuade a person to anything !
On Mrs . Jennings ' s compassion she had other claims .
" If such is your way of thinking ," said Marianne , " if the loss of what is most valued is so easily to be made up by something else , your resolution , your self - command , are , perhaps , a little less to be wondered at .-- They are brought more within my comprehension ."
There was only a small part of his estate that Sir Walter could dispose of ; but had every acre been alienable , it would have made no difference .
She felt its application to herself , felt it in a nervous thrill all over her ; and at the same moment that her eyes instinctively glanced towards the distant table , Captain Wentworth ' s pen ceased to move , his head was raised , pausing , listening , and he turned round the next instant to give a look , one quick , conscious look at her .
CHAPTER VIII
Do not forget me when you are married , that ' s all .
But what I mean is , that I hope there is nothing in Captain Wentworth ' s manner of writing to make you suppose he thinks himself ill - used by his friend , which might appear , you know , without its being absolutely said .
CHAPTER 11
She heard him sigh .
But what is distance , Mr . Weston , to people of large fortune ?-- You would be amazed to hear how my brother , Mr . Suckling , sometimes flies about .
Knightley and Harriet Smith !-- Such an elevation on her side !
" No , it by no means wanted strength -- it was not a large hand , but very clear and certainly strong .
and unfortunately " ( speaking low and tremulously ) " there are so many who forget to think seriously till it is almost too late ."
Nobody can be more devoted to home than I am .
said Elinor , " do you call Colonel Brandon infirm ?
Jennings , with a very intelligent " Ah !
" Four years you have been engaged ," said she with a firm voice .
Nobody is healthy in London , nobody can be .
I only name possibilities .
" There is hardly any personal defect ," replied Anne , " which an agreeable manner might not gradually reconcile one to ."
" Ay , you will make conquests enough , I dare say , one way or other .
But fetch them both .
He begged her pardon , but she must be applied to , to explain Italian again .
Now Emma was obliged to think of the pianoforte ; and the remembrance of all her former fanciful and unfair conjectures was so little pleasing , that she soon allowed herself to believe her visit had been long enough ; and , with a repetition of every thing that she could venture to say of the good wishes which she really felt , took leave .
" Oh !
As to connexion , there Emma was perfectly easy ; persuaded , that after all his own vaunted claims and disdain of Harriet , he had done nothing .
You must consider me only as Mr Elliot ' s relation .
He felt the going away almost too much to speak of it .
What a letter the man writes !"
I assure you , Jane Fairfax is a very delightful character , and interests me more than I can express ."
" Aye , very true .
And I hope she will be better off in one respect , and not be induced to go away after it has been her home so long ."
" But where could _you_ hear it ?"
Perhaps she ought to be ashamed , but Mr . Weston had been almost as uneasy as herself .-- In ten minutes , however , the child had been perfectly well again .
The next morning brought a farther trial of it , in a visit from their brother , who came with a most serious aspect to talk over the dreadful affair , and bring them news of his wife .
" It cannot be generally known ," returned Elinor , " for her own family do not know it ."
I do suspect that he is not really necessary to my happiness .
An opportunity of coming hither , though with Mrs . Jennings , was a temptation we could not resist .
Mrs . Palmer was several years younger than Lady Middleton , and totally unlike her in every respect .
" Well !
His two other children were of very inferior value .
I am sure she will be here presently ."
" No , no , some time or other , perhaps , but not now .
A real injury to the children -- a most mortifying change , and material loss to them all ;-- a very great deduction from her father ' s daily comfort -- and , as to herself , she could not at all endure the idea of Jane Fairfax at Donwell Abbey .
She was not yet dancing ; she was working her way up from the bottom , and had therefore leisure to look around , and by only turning her head a little she saw it all .
So sudden !-- You may guess , dear Miss Woodhouse , what a flurry it has thrown me in !
" I thought it my duty ," said he , " independent of my feelings , to give her the option of continuing the engagement or not , when I was renounced by my mother , and stood to all appearance without a friend in the world to assist me .
She spoke , and seemed only to offend .
But I have no reason to suppose it so .
In the warmth of the moment , and under a mistaken impression , I might , perhaps , have endeavoured to interest you in some circumstances ; but not now .
" There is nothing so bad as a separation .
And as for Harriet , I will venture to say that _she_ cannot gain by the acquaintance .
But , however , so it is .
Dear Emma has been to call on Mrs . and Miss Bates , Mr . Knightley , as I told you before .
He can sit down and write a fine flourishing letter , full of professions and falsehoods , and persuade himself that he has hit upon the very best method in the world of preserving peace at home and preventing his father ' s having any right to complain .
If their praise is censure , your censure may be praise , for they are not more undiscerning , than you are prejudiced and unjust ."
At one moment she was absolutely indifferent to the observation of all the world , at another she would seclude herself from it for ever , and at a third could resist it with energy .
Elinor could not be cheerful .
" Poor little creatures !"
It is too ridiculous !
says I , ' is Mrs . Dashwood ill ?'
But Mrs . Dashwood , trusting to the temperate account of her own disappointment which Elinor had sent her , was led away by the exuberance of her joy to think only of what would increase it .
Mr . Knightley was hard at work upon the lower buttons of his thick leather gaiters , and either the exertion of getting them together , or some other cause , brought the colour into his face , as he answered ,
With regard to Captain Wentworth , though Anne hazarded no enquiries , there was voluntary communication sufficient .
" My judgment ," he returned , " is all on your side of the question ; but I am afraid my practice is much more on your sister ' s .
But stranger things have happened ; and when we cease to care for each other as we do now , it will be the means of confirming us in that sort of true disinterested friendship which I can already look forward to with pleasure ."
My perpetual influence could not begin earlier , or you would not have been so much out of humour before ."
But hardly had she so spoken , when she found her brother was civilly offering a seat in his carriage , if the weather were Mr . Elton ' s only objection , and Mr . Elton actually accepting the offer with much prompt satisfaction .
The post - office has a great charm at one period of our lives .
" Had they told me ," he cried with vehemence , " that Mr . Palmer and all his relations were at the devil , it would not have turned me from the door .
Here , she must be leading a life of privation and penance ; there it would have been all enjoyment .
Emma would not agree to this , and began a warm defence of Miss Fairfax ' s complexion .
" This was settled last night , and Frank was off with the light this morning .
Can I do any thing for you ?"
She could not distinguish , but she must guess the subject ; and on Captain Wentworth ' s making a distant bow , she comprehended that her father had judged so well as to give him that simple acknowledgement of acquaintance , and she was just in time by a side glance to see a slight curtsey from Elizabeth herself .
" Poor Mr . and Miss Woodhouse , if you please ; but I cannot possibly say ` poor Miss Taylor .'
She might not wonder , but she must sigh that her father should feel no degradation in his change , should see nothing to regret in the duties and dignity of the resident landholder , should find so much to be vain of in the littlenesses of a town ; and she must sigh , and smile , and wonder too , as Elizabeth threw open the folding - doors and walked with exultation from one drawing - room to the other , boasting of their space ; at the possibility of that woman , who had been mistress of Kellynch Hall , finding extent to be proud of between two walls , perhaps thirty feet asunder .
Emma was very willing now to acquit her of having seduced Mr . Dixon ' s actions from his wife , or of any thing mischievous which her imagination had suggested at first .
She could not quit that room in peace without seeing Captain Wentworth once more , without the interchange of one friendly look .
Elinor looked as if she wished to hear more .
" You have heard , I suppose ," said he with great solemnity , as soon as he was seated , " of the very shocking discovery that took place under our roof yesterday ."
He had formerly visited at Stanhill , but it was too long for his young cousins to remember him .
" What am I to imagine , Willoughby , by your behaviour last night ?
I was almost afraid you would be hurrying home ."
Where a man does his best with only moderate powers , he will have the advantage over negligent superiority .
" Excuse me ," said she ; " and be assured that I meant no offence to you , by speaking , in so quiet a way , of my own feelings .
" Yes , ma ' am .
I mean while the woman you love lives , and lives for you .
She generally thought he would come , because she generally thought he ought ; but it was a case which she could not so shape into any positive act of duty or discretion , as inevitably to defy the suggestions of very opposite feelings .
You will say that I am quite an invalid , and go no where , and therefore must decline their obliging invitation ; beginning with my _compliments_ , of course .
Nothing to signify .
She had had a disappointment , moreover , which that book , and especially the history of her own family , must ever present the remembrance of .
I was ready to have gone with her , but this will do just as well .
" And what a charming little family they have !
I earnestly pressed his coming to us , and should not be surprised to see him walk in today or tomorrow , or any day ."
Here Marianne , in an ecstasy of indignation , clapped her hands together , and cried , " Gracious God !
Emma wished to go to work directly , and therefore produced the portfolio containing her various attempts at portraits , for not one of them had ever been finished , that they might decide together on the best size for Harriet .
" And while Mrs . Weston pays her visit , I may be allowed , I hope ," said Frank Churchill , " to join your party and wait for her at Hartfield -- if you are going home ."
" It was what she had been thinking of , and wishing to be allowed to do .
But , my dear , is not this rather out of character ?
It is so ridiculous !"
The carriage would not accommodate so many .
She did not imagine that her father had at present an idea of the kind .
A short , a very short time however must now decide what Willoughby ' s intentions were ; in all probability he was already in town .
If you wish me to talk to Mrs . Hodges , or to inspect anything --"
I have many things to support me .
Were I to fall in love , indeed , it would be a different thing !
I must speak to you by such means as are within my reach .
now you are looking very sly .
Miss Taylor , if you had not married , you would have staid at home with me ."
Oh , no !
" How charming it will be ," said Charlotte , " when he is in Parliament !-- won ' t it ?
They would catch worse colds at the Crown than anywhere ."
those dear little children .
I believe it is the only way that Mr . Woodhouse thinks the fruit thoroughly wholesome .
" You forget ," said Elinor gently , " that its situation is not ... that it is not in the neighbourhood of ..."
Her mother could even think of her being able to join their party at home , before her brothers and sisters went to school again .
" I agree with you exactly .
And then , to prevent farther outrage and indignation , changed the subject directly .
" Where is the green - house to be ?"
I had not thought of it before , but that is the best way .
And after thinking it all over and over again , he said , it seemed to him as if , now he had no fortune , and no nothing at all , it would be quite unkind to keep her on to the engagement , because it must be for her loss , for he had nothing but two thousand pounds , and no hope of any thing else ; and if he was to go into orders , as he had some thoughts , he could get nothing but a curacy , and how was they to live upon that ?-- He could not bear to think of her doing no better , and so he begged , if she had the least mind for it , to put an end to the matter directly , and leave him shift for himself .
Elinor ' s heart could easily account for his not putting himself forward ; and Mrs . Dashwood probably found the same explanation .
Mrs . Ferrars was a little , thin woman , upright , even to formality , in her figure , and serious , even to sourness , in her aspect .
Elinor gloried in his integrity ; and Marianne forgave all his offences in compassion for his punishment .
interrupted Emma , " there will be plenty of time for talking every thing over .
" I wish it could be so easily settled .
then , don ' t speak it , don ' t speak it ," she eagerly cried .
The last office of the four carriage - horses was to draw Sir Walter , Miss Elliot , and Mrs Clay to Bath .
I could not have visited Mrs . Robert Martin , of Abbey - Mill Farm .
Mr . Frank Churchill did not come .
The listener ' s proverbial fate was not absolutely hers ; she had heard no evil of herself , but she had heard a great deal of very painful import .
I only smirked and bowed , and said the word ` happy .'
She felt that half this folly must be drunkenness , and therefore could hope that it might belong only to the passing hour .
She is a woman that one may , that one _must_ laugh at ; but that one would not wish to slight .
Charles Musgrove , indeed , afterwards , shewed more of inclination ; " the child was going on so well , and he wished so much to be introduced to Captain Wentworth , that , perhaps , he might join them in the evening ; he would not dine from home , but he might walk in for half an hour ."
she replied with a smile of astonishment , " are you imagining me to be Mr . Elton ' s object ?"
He must know that the Woodhouses had been settled for several generations at Hartfield , the younger branch of a very ancient family -- and that the Eltons were nobody .
They secure an introduction .
The most indefatigable , true friend .
" Well , my dear Jane , I believe we must be running away .
The wedding was very much like other weddings , where the parties have no taste for finery or parade ; and Mrs . Elton , from the particulars detailed by her husband , thought it all extremely shabby , and very inferior to her own .--" Very little white satin , very few lace veils ; a most pitiful business !-- Selina would stare when she heard of it ."
He made no answer ; and soon afterwards , by the removal of the tea - things , and the arrangement of the card parties , the subject was necessarily dropped .
" Almost this moment ."
It must be a work of time to ascertain that no injury had been done to the spine ; but Mr Robinson found nothing to increase alarm , and Charles Musgrove began , consequently , to feel no necessity for longer confinement .
Elinor encouraged her as much as possible to talk of what she felt ; and before breakfast was ready , they had gone through the subject again and again ; and with the same steady conviction and affectionate counsel on Elinor ' s side , the same impetuous feelings and varying opinions on Marianne ' s , as before .
Anne ' s mind was in a most favourable state for the entertainment of the evening ; it was just occupation enough : she had feelings for the tender , spirits for the gay , attention for the scientific , and patience for the wearisome ; and had never liked a concert better , at least during the first act .
" The carriage !
" Jane , Jane , my dear Jane , where are you ?-- Here is your tippet .
This is a matter of mere common politeness and good - breeding , and has nothing to do with any encouragement to people to marry ."
His errand at Barton , in fact , was a simple one .
was the reply , and with a look of surprise .
She had never rejoiced at the sound before , nor ever before entered the passage , nor walked up the stairs , with any wish of giving pleasure , but in conferring obligation , or of deriving it , except in subsequent ridicule .
Latterly , however -- for some time , indeed -- I have had no idea of their meaning any thing .-- I thought them a habit , a trick , nothing that called for seriousness on my side .
She deserves a better fate ."
" Oh !
I have had such a time of it !
A worthy employment for a young lady ' s mind !
Mrs . Goddard , what say you to _half_ a glass of wine ?
They ought to have balls there at least every fortnight through the winter .
Gilbert would have danced the other evening , if she had been asked .
Lord !
I was quite a proverb for it at Maple Grove .
but I never have been in love ; it is not my way , or my nature ; and I do not think I ever shall .
She had a great idea that people who had extensive grounds themselves cared very little for the extensive grounds of any body else ; but it was not worth while to attack an error so double - dyed , and therefore only said in reply ,
" Very well , I am much obliged to you .
You will soon be able to judge of the general credit due , by listening to some particulars which you can yourself immediately contradict or confirm .
Do not defer it .
But the rain was also a mere trifle to Mrs Clay ; she would hardly allow it even to drop at all , and her boots were so thick !
" No , no , not at all -- only a little agitated .
Churchill ."
Mary was not so repulsive and unsisterly as Elizabeth , nor so inaccessible to all influence of hers ; neither was there anything among the other component parts of the cottage inimical to comfort .
He called her ` Augusta .'
He looked at her , looked at Lady Russell , and looking again at her , replied , as if in cool deliberation --
I consider one as including the other .
A very friendly inquiry after Miss Fairfax , she hoped , might lead the way to a return of old feelings .
He paused .-- She coloured and laughed .--" I know you saw my letter , and think you may remember my wish in your favour .
Mrs . Dashwood , however , conforming , as she trusted , to the wishes of that daughter , by whom she then meant in the warmth of her heart to be guided in every thing , met with a look of forced complacency , gave him her hand , and wished him joy .
She was ashamed of herself , quite ashamed of being so nervous , so overcome by such a trifle ; but so it was , and it required a long application of solitude and reflection to recover her .
She could not call herself an invalid now , compared with her state on first reaching Bath .
Not the smallest suspicion , therefore , had ever occurred to prepare him for what followed ;-- and when at last it burst on him in a letter from Lucy herself , he had been for some time , he believed , half stupified between the wonder , the horror , and the joy of such a deliverance .
To be claimed as a good , though in an improper style , is at least better than being rejected as no good at all ; and Anne , glad to be thought of some use , glad to have anything marked out as a duty , and certainly not sorry to have the scene of it in the country , and her own dear country , readily agreed to stay .
You will be setting your cap at him now , and never think of poor Brandon ."
But Emma still shook her head in steady scepticism .
And the next moment she was hating herself for the folly which asked the question .
Her opinion varying with every fresh conjecture , and all seeming equally probable as they arose .
She has talked of it since .
They now walked on together quietly , till within view of the vicarage pales , when a sudden resolution , of at least getting Harriet into the house , made her again find something very much amiss about her boot , and fall behind to arrange it once more .
" Indeed , Harriet , it would have been a severe pang to lose you ; but it must have been .
what a delightful room this is !
" If so , you must extend your suspicions and comprehend _Mr_ .
On another ,
There could hardly be a happier creature in the world than Mrs . John Knightley , in this short visit to Hartfield , going about every morning among her old acquaintance with her five children , and talking over what she had done every evening with her father and sister .
" My brother and sister have promised us a visit in the spring , or summer at farthest ," continued Mrs . Elton ; " and that will be our time for exploring .
It was THAT which threw this gloom ,-- even now the recollection of what I suffered --"
The only wonder was , what they could be waiting for , till the business at Lyme came ; then , indeed , it was clear enough that they must wait till her brain was set to right .
She roused herself to say , as they struck by order into another path , " Is not this one of the ways to Winthrop ?"
" Then it would not be so strong a sense .
It was broken by Lucy , who renewed the subject again by saying , with some hesitation ,
You quite shock me ; if you mean a fling at the slave - trade , I assure you Mr . Suckling was always rather a friend to the abolition ."
This is feeling your way .
cried Marianne , with strong surprise .
" And so do I .
We shall enjoy him completely ; every thing has turned out exactly as we could wish ."
" Oh !
But I am afraid ; and I should be so very sorry .
It was a very extraordinary thing !
You have always a profession , pursuits , business of some sort or other , to take you back into the world immediately , and continual occupation and change soon weaken impressions ."
--
" And I am sure ," cried Mary , warmly , " it was a very little to his credit , if he did .
I have had no hand in it .
The undesirableness of any other house in the same neighbourhood for Sir Walter was certainly much strengthened by one part , and a very material part of the scheme , which had been happily engrafted on the beginning .
no ; cautious as a minister of state .
Miss Bates was out , which accounted for the previous tranquillity .
With almost every other man in the world , it would be an alarming prospect ; but Edward ' s affection and constancy nothing can deprive me of I know ."
such delicacy !-- and yet without being actually fair .-- One cannot call her fair .
She found , however , that it was one to which she must inure herself .
" Mr . Weston do not trifle with me .-- Consider how many of my dearest friends are now in Brunswick Square .
Elinor ' s heart thanked her for such kindness towards Edward , though she could not forbear smiling at the form of it .
But I don ' t think mine would be , to make one son independent , because another had plagued me ."
" Oh !
I knew him to be a very good sort of man , and I thought well of his daughter -- better than she deserved , for , with a most obstinate and ill - judged secrecy , she would tell nothing , would give no clue , though she certainly knew all .
In such moments of precious , invaluable misery , she rejoiced in tears of agony to be at Cleveland ; and as she returned by a different circuit to the house , feeling all the happy privilege of country liberty , of wandering from place to place in free and luxurious solitude , she resolved to spend almost every hour of every day while she remained with the Palmers , in the indulgence of such solitary rambles .
I ought to travel .
But at last a soft , genial morning appeared ; such as might tempt the daughter ' s wishes and the mother ' s confidence ; and Marianne , leaning on Elinor ' s arm , was authorised to walk as long as she could without fatigue , in the lane before the house .
He could sing a little himself .
I am rather proud of little George .
To you -- to my two daughters -- I may venture on the truth .
Emma could look perfectly unconscious and innocent , and answer in a manner that appropriated nothing .
He was invited again to Camden Place the very evening of his return ; but from Thursday to Saturday evening his absence was certain .
He is no hypocrite now .
Other designs might afterward arise ."
I heard a good deal of Colonel Campbell ' s taste at Weymouth ; and the softness of the upper notes I am sure is exactly what he and _all_ _that_ _party_ would particularly prize .
Elinor was obliged to turn from her , in the middle of her story , to receive the rest of the party ; Lady Middleton introduced the two strangers ; Mrs . Dashwood and Margaret came down stairs at the same time , and they all sat down to look at one another , while Mrs . Jennings continued her story as she walked through the passage into the parlour , attended by Sir John .
" You are materially changed since we talked on this subject before ."
He stopped .
" But why should such precaution be used ?-- Though it is not to be supposed that Mrs . Ferrars can have the smallest satisfaction in knowing that her son has money enough to live upon ,-- for THAT must be quite out of the question ; yet why , upon her late behaviour , is she supposed to feel at all ?-- She has done with her son , she cast him off for ever , and has made all those over whom she had any influence , cast him off likewise .
Colonel Brandon alone , of all the party , heard her without being in raptures .
Does not she , Jane ?-- Do not we often talk of Mr . Frank Churchill ?-- Ah !
They combated the point some time longer in the same way ; Emma rather gaining ground over the mind of her friend ; for Mrs . Weston was the most used of the two to yield ; till a little bustle in the room shewed them that tea was over , and the instrument in preparation ;-- and at the same moment Mr . Cole approaching to entreat Miss Woodhouse would do them the honour of trying it .
But Mrs Clay was talking so eagerly with Miss Elliot , that she did not hear the appeal .
No one , at least , can think I have not done enough for them : even themselves , they can hardly expect more ."
The idea of Mr . Elton was certainly cheering ; but still , after a time , she was tender - hearted again towards the rejected Mr . Martin .
She deprecated the connexion in every light .
When Marianne was recovered , the schemes of amusement at home and abroad , which Sir John had been previously forming , were put into execution .
Elinor ' s heart was full .
That I should ever have meant more you will allow to be impossible , when you understand that my affections have been long engaged elsewhere , and it will not be many weeks , I believe , before this engagement is fulfilled .
" I am sorry she is not well --" for Marianne had left the room on their arrival .
These were words which could not but dwell with her .
These were thoughts , with their attendant visions , which occupied and flurried her too much to leave her any power of observation ; and she passed along the room without having a glimpse of him , without even trying to discern him .
Anne did think on the question with perfect decision , and said as much in reply as her own feeling could accomplish , or as his seemed able to bear , for he was too much affected to renew the subject , and when he spoke again , it was of something totally different .
Now I cannot say , that I think you are any of you looking well at present ."
Look at those hills !
Thirteen years had passed away since Lady Elliot ' s death , and they were still near neighbours and intimate friends , and one remained a widower , the other a widow .
How could you suppose so ?
" Upon my word ," said she , " I should not have supposed that my opinion of any one could have admitted of such difference of conjecture , steady and matter of fact as I may call myself .
Emma was obliged to fancy what she liked -- but she could never believe that in the same situation _she_ should not have discovered the truth .
Emma thought at least it would turn out so .
Sixteen miles -- nay , eighteen -- it must be full eighteen to Manchester - street -- was a serious obstacle .
And Mr . Dixon seems a very charming young man , quite worthy of him .
They wanted him to make a fine figure in the world in some manner or other .
What you direct in this house cannot be wrong .
Captain Harville holds himself quite engaged , I ' ll answer for it ; and Captain Wentworth the same , I dare say ."
" It is unfortunate that they cannot stay longer -- but it seems a case of necessity .
Fanny paused a moment , and then , with fresh vigor , said ,
I am not particularly disposed to favour a tenant .
I pity HER .
The morning was rather favourable , though it had rained all night , as the clouds were then dispersing across the sky , and the sun frequently appeared .
" If it depended only on my inclination , ma ' am , the party at home ( excepting on Mary ' s account ) would not be the smallest impediment .
It should not , must not be a struggle ."
It would be almost beginning their life of civility again .
Astonishment , that would have been as painful as it was strong , had not an immediate disbelief of the assertion attended it .
For their brother ' s sake , too , for the sake of his own heart , she rejoiced ; and she reproached herself for being unjust to his merit before , in believing him incapable of generosity .
It was contrary to every doctrine of her ' s that difference of fortune should keep any couple asunder who were attracted by resemblance of disposition ; and that Elinor ' s merit should not be acknowledged by every one who knew her , was to her comprehension impossible .
She had been very fond of her husband : she had buried him .
He had met her before breakfast as he was returning from a walk with his little boys , when it had been just beginning to rain .
He sat by her at dinner .
What arises from discretion must be honoured ."
She was sure it was very ill -- it cried , and fretted , and was all over pimples .
They think themselves secure , you do no more than what is expected , and it raises no gratitude at all .
" There is no charm equal to tenderness of heart ," said she afterwards to herself .
But this was not all which they had to make them happy .
This lock of hair , which now he can so readily give up , was begged of me with the most earnest supplication .
Her objections to Mr . Knightley ' s marrying did not in the least subside .
This is all in confirmation , rather , of what we used to hear and believe .
To him therefore the succession to the Norland estate was not so really important as to his sisters ; for their fortune , independent of what might arise to them from their father ' s inheriting that property , could be but small .
Mrs Musgrove protests solemnly that she knew nothing of the matter .
But I cannot imagine how I could be so off my guard .
" The whole history ," repeated Anne , laughing .
" Yes , very true .
She walked eagerly on as she spoke ; and Elinor , to screen Marianne from particularity , as she felt almost certain of its not being Willoughby , quickened her pace and kept up with her .
Fairfax of the _______ regiment of infantry , and Miss Jane Bates , had had its day of fame and pleasure , hope and interest ; but nothing now remained of it , save the melancholy remembrance of him dying in action abroad -- of his widow sinking under consumption and grief soon afterwards -- and this girl .
This lady was one of my nearest relations , an orphan from her infancy , and under the guardianship of my father .
A very little trouble on your side secures him .
He had been lucky in his profession ; but spending freely , what had come freely , had realized nothing .
Then turning to Isabella , who had not been attending before --" You must know , my dear Mrs . Knightley , that we are by no means so sure of seeing Mr . Frank Churchill , in my opinion , as his father thinks .
I was afraid there could be little chance of my hearing any thing of Miss Fairfax to - day ."
I can have no self - command without a motive .
His wife was not always out of humour , nor his home always uncomfortable ; and in his breed of horses and dogs , and in sporting of every kind , he found no inconsiderable degree of domestic felicity .
" Ah !
I was privy to all the fors and againsts ; I was the friend to whom he confided his hopes and plans ; and though I did not know his wife previously , her inferior situation in society , indeed , rendered that impossible , yet I knew her all her life afterwards , or at least till within the last two years of her life , and can answer any question you may wish to put ."
She sat by the drawing - room fire after tea , till the moment of Lady Middleton ' s arrival , without once stirring from her seat , or altering her attitude , lost in her own thoughts , and insensible of her sister ' s presence ; and when at last they were told that Lady Middleton waited for them at the door , she started as if she had forgotten that any one was expected .
They were now joined by Mrs . Jennings , who had not patience enough to wait till the door was opened before she told HER story .
She had little difficulty ; it was soon determined that they would go ; go to - morrow , fix themselves at the inn , or get into lodgings , as it suited , and there remain till dear Louisa could be moved .
The alteration is not in them , if their parties are grown tedious and dull .
" I mean to go with you , Charles , for I am of no more use at home than you are .
You will allow me to bring Jane Fairfax ?"
It is only by seeing women in their own homes , among their own set , just as they always are , that you can form any just judgment .
After a little succession of these sort of debates and consultations , it was settled between Charles and his two sisters , that he and Henrietta should just run down for a few minutes , to see their aunt and cousins , while the rest of the party waited for them at the top of the hill .
They saw nothing of Marianne till dinner time , when she entered the room and took her place at the table without saying a word .
" Not at all -- I never saw him ; but I fancy he is very unlike his brother -- silly and a great coxcomb ."
In a morning ' s excursion to Exeter , they had met with two young ladies , whom Mrs . Jennings had the satisfaction of discovering to be her relations , and this was enough for Sir John to invite them directly to the park , as soon as their present engagements at Exeter were over .
actually resolve to break with him entirely !-- She felt the engagement to be a source of repentance and misery to each -- she dissolved it .-- What a view this gives of her sense of his behaviour !-- Well , he must be a most extraordinary --"
There go you and your riddle - book one of these days ."
For a moment the gratification was exquisite .
" Perhaps I shall .
said he .
Isabella stept in after her father ; John Knightley , forgetting that he did not belong to their party , stept in after his wife very naturally ; so that Emma found , on being escorted and followed into the second carriage by Mr . Elton , that the door was to be lawfully shut on them , and that they were to have a tete - a - tete drive .
But I know they will , because it is a family that a certain lady , of some consequence , at Enscombe , has a particular dislike to : and though it is thought necessary to invite them once in two or three years , they always are put off when it comes to the point .
Much better employed talking to the young ladies .
repeated Mrs . Jennings --" Oh !
He had quitted Oxford within four and twenty hours after Lucy ' s letter arrived , and with only one object before him , the nearest road to Barton , had had no leisure to form any scheme of conduct , with which that road did not hold the most intimate connection .
You cannot be ignorant , Mrs . Elton , of my connexion with the family , nor of the treatment I have met with ; and , between ourselves , the whole blame of it is to be laid to her .
" Dear affectionate creature !-- _You_ banished to Abbey - Mill Farm !-- _You_ confined to the society of the illiterate and vulgar all your life !
Emma pondered a moment , and then replied , " I will not pretend _not_ to understand you ; and to give you all the relief in my power , be assured that no such effect has followed his attentions to me , as you are apprehensive of ."
Before the middle of the next day , he was at Hartfield ; and he entered the room with such an agreeable smile as certified the continuance of the scheme .
he replied impressively , " there is nothing worth my staying for ;" and he was gone directly .
She could not but smile to see the graciousness of both mother and daughter towards the very person -- for Lucy was particularly distinguished -- whom of all others , had they known as much as she did , they would have been most anxious to mortify ; while she herself , who had comparatively no power to wound them , sat pointedly slighted by both .
-- Highbury , with Mrs . Weston , stood for Hartfield ; and she trusted to its bearing the same construction with him .
I remember her promising to give you some .
" No .
In half a minute they were together .
he is off .
It came out quite unawares , quite undesignedly .
Recollecting himself , however , he added , " That is , I mean to say -- your friends are all truly anxious to see you well settled ; Fanny particularly , for she has your interest very much at heart , I assure you .
I knew she would .
She was pleased , on taking leave , to find Miss Fairfax determined to attend her out of the room , to go with her even downstairs ; it gave her an opportunity which she immediately made use of , to say ,
" Upon my word ," replied Elinor , " you know much more of the matter than I do , if you have any reason to expect such a match ."
I shall do something to expose myself ."
Emma , on reaching home , called the housekeeper directly , to an examination of her stores ; and some arrowroot of very superior quality was speedily despatched to Miss Bates with a most friendly note .
Had he never owned his affection to yourself ?"
Such were my reasonings , as , in a sort of desperate carelessness , I copied my wife ' s words , and parted with the last relics of Marianne .
" Well , well , means to make her an offer then .
For the first time , since their renewed acquaintance , she felt that she was betraying the least sensibility of the two .
Mrs . Churchill had been recommended to the medical skill of an eminent person there , and had otherwise a fancy for the place .
Had Lady Dalrymple and her daughter even been very agreeable , she would still have been ashamed of the agitation they created , but they were nothing .
We have neither of us any thing to tell ; you , because you do not communicate , and I , because I conceal nothing ."
Miss Fairfax , you must not run such risks .-- Liable as you have been to severe colds , indeed you ought to be particularly careful , especially at this time of year .
And as to my father , I really should not have thought that he , who has kept himself single so long for our sakes , need be suspected now .
My mother often talks of your good - nature .
" You have no ambition , I well know .
He ought not ; he does not ."
I do not think any young woman has a right to make a choice that may be disagreeable and inconvenient to the principal part of her family , and be giving bad connections to those who have not been used to them .
I know he did .
The Musgroves are behaving like themselves , most honourably and kindly , only anxious with true parental hearts to promote their daughter ' s comfort .
Captain Wentworth believed it impossible for man to be more attached to woman than poor Benwick had been to Fanny Harville , or to be more deeply afflicted under the dreadful change .
" He did .
Mrs Clay decidedly thought it Mr Elliot ' s knock ."
And then not to find him at home !
You had better look about you , and ascertain what you do , and what you mean to do ."
You cannot imagine how suddenly it has come on me !
Mrs Harville says her husband feels a good deal on his poor sister ' s account ; but , however , Louisa is a great favourite with both .
cried Captain Harville , in a tone of strong feeling , " if I could but make you comprehend what a man suffers when he takes a last look at his wife and children , and watches the boat that he has sent them off in , as long as it is in sight , and then turns away and says , ` God knows whether we ever meet again !'
She , who had seen her week after week so constantly suffering , oppressed by anguish of heart which she had neither courage to speak of , nor fortitude to conceal , now saw with a joy , which no other could equally share , an apparent composure of mind , which , in being the result as she trusted of serious reflection , must eventually lead her to contentment and cheerfulness .
Quite a humourist .
It was a melancholy change ; and Emma could not but sigh over it , and wish for impossible things , till her father awoke , and made it necessary to be cheerful .
I could not bear that she should be frightened from the visit by such nonsense .
Thank Heaven !
Anne could think of no one so likely to have spoken with partiality of her many years ago as the Mr Wentworth of Monkford , Captain Wentworth ' s brother .
Would he have been less gay or less happy in the smiles of your sister ?
Miss Woodhouse , how kind you are !-- I suppose you have heard -- and are come to give us joy .
yes -- Mr . Elton , I understand -- certainly as to dancing -- Mrs . Cole was telling me that dancing at the rooms at Bath was -- Mrs . Cole was so kind as to sit some time with us , talking of Jane ; for as soon as she came in , she began inquiring after her , Jane is so very great a favourite there .
If there is anything in my story which you know to be either false or improbable , stop me .
Let my accents swell to Mickleham on one side , and Dorking on the other .
There was not a baronet from A to Z whom her feelings could have so willingly acknowledged as an equal .
Somebody said that _Miss_ Gilbert was expected at her brother ' s , and must be invited with the rest .
It was his duty .
how troublesome they are sometimes .
But I was really quite shocked the other day -- for Mr . Knightley called one morning , and Jane was eating these apples , and we talked about them and said how much she enjoyed them , and he asked whether we were not got to the end of our stock .
Anne heard nothing of this .
Because you are so sly about it yourself , you think nobody else has any senses ; but it is no such thing , I can tell you , for it has been known all over town this ever so long .
Harriet , Mr . Elton , and Mr . Knightley , their own especial set , were the only persons invited to meet them ;-- the hours were to be early , as well as the numbers few ; Mr . Woodhouse ' s habits and inclination being consulted in every thing .
Cannot you imagine , Mr . Knightley , what a _sensation_ his coming will produce ?
I am really tired of exploring so long on one spot .
Pray assure him of it ."
Morning visits are never fair by women at her time of life , who make themselves up so little .
Charles came a few hours afterwards , to bring a later and more particular account .
" My love I would ask them with all my heart , if it was in my power .
She knew that what Marianne and her mother conjectured one moment , they believed the next -- that with them , to wish was to hope , and to hope was to expect .
Some of the objects of his curiosity spoke very amiable feelings .
It was a style of beauty , of which elegance was the reigning character , and as such , she must , in honour , by all her principles , admire it :-- elegance , which , whether of person or of mind , she saw so little in Highbury .
" Ah !
I once knew a lady who in temper and mind greatly resembled your sister , who thought and judged like her , but who from an inforced change -- from a series of unfortunate circumstances "-- Here he stopt suddenly ; appeared to think that he had said too much , and by his countenance gave rise to conjectures , which might not otherwise have entered Elinor ' s head .
" If he would be so good as to read to them , it would be a kindness indeed !
" Indeed I shall be very much obliged to you for your help ," cried Lucy , " for I find there is more to be done to it than I thought there was ; and it would be a shocking thing to disappoint dear Annamaria after all ."
Anne looked down to hide her smile .
It was certainly carried nearly as far as possible , for they met every morning , and hardly ever spent an evening asunder ; but she believed they should not have done so well without the sight of Mr and Mrs Musgrove ' s respectable forms in the usual places , or without the talking , laughing , and singing of their daughters .
No more would Sir John , nor my daughters , for they are all very thoughtful and considerate ; especially if I give them a hint , as I certainly will .
She was deeply ashamed , and a little afraid of his next look .
Miss Hawkins ,-- I dare say , an excellent young woman .
A very proper compliment !-- and then follows the application , which I think , my dear Harriet , you cannot find much difficulty in comprehending .
I saw the word , and am curious to know how it could be so very entertaining to the one , and so very distressing to the other ."
" With me !"
" Oh !
" I do not consider its length as particularly in its favour .
" The cruelty , the impolitic cruelty ,"-- he replied , with great feeling ,--" of dividing , or attempting to divide , two young people long attached to each other , is terrible .-- Mrs . Ferrars does not know what she may be doing -- what she may drive her son to .
His medicines had failed ;-- the fever was unabated ; and Marianne only more quiet -- not more herself -- remained in a heavy stupor .
" But how shall we prove anything ?"
" I am sorry to hear you say so , sir ; but I assure you , excepting those little nervous head - aches and palpitations which I am never entirely free from anywhere , I am quite well myself ; and if the children were rather pale before they went to bed , it was only because they were a little more tired than usual , from their journey and the happiness of coming .
He was the only person in the world who could at that moment be forgiven for not being Willoughby ; the only one who could have gained a smile from her ; but she dispersed her tears to smile on HIM , and in her sister ' s happiness forgot for a time her own disappointment .
" Happy with a man of libertine practices !-- With one who so injured the peace of the dearest of our friends , and the best of men !-- No -- my Marianne has not a heart to be made happy with such a man !-- Her conscience , her sensitive conscience , would have felt all that the conscience of her husband ought to have felt ."
" No , none at all ," he replied , and read on .
He is an excellent young man , both as son and brother .
Of course I have not transcribed beyond the first eight lines ."
She only consulted Lady Russell , who entered thoroughly into her sentiments , and was most happy to convey her as near to Mrs Smith ' s lodgings in Westgate Buildings , as Anne chose to be taken .
Emma saw Mrs . Weston ' s surprize , and felt that it must be great , at an address which , in words and manner , was assuming to himself the right of first interest in her ; and as for herself , she was too much provoked and offended to have the power of directly saying any thing to the purpose .
Thank you , my mother is remarkably well .
" Lord !
Emma had done .
It ought to be a first object , as I am sure poor Miss Taylor ' s always was with me .
How cold , how composed were their last adieus !
" Then you would have told me , that it might or might not have happened .
She had understood it was to be delayed till Colonel Campbell ' s return ."
For some weeks past she had been spending more than half her time there , and gradually getting to have a bed - room appropriated to herself ; and Emma judged it best in every respect , safest and kindest , to keep her with them as much as possible just at present .
I know you love a play ; and there is room for us all .
It might be weeks , it might be only a few days , before the horse were useable ; but no preparations could be ventured on , and it was all melancholy stagnation .
" This is the luxury of a large party ," said she :--" one can get near every body , and say every thing .
It seemed quite a shame , especially considering how many houses there are where fine instruments are absolutely thrown away .
He expressed great pleasure in meeting Elinor , told her that he had been just going to call in Berkeley Street , and , assuring her that Fanny would be very glad to see her , invited her to come in .
Another accidental meeting with the Martins was possible , and in her present state , would be dangerous .
Emma ' s politeness was at hand directly , to say , with smiling interest --
" February 1st .
Her recent good offices by Anne had been enough in themselves , and their marriage , instead of depriving her of one friend , secured her two .
This was an affair , however , of which Lady Middleton did not approve .
The impossibility of her quitting her father , Mr . Knightley felt as strongly as herself ; but the inadmissibility of any other change , he could not agree to .
It was too pleasing a blunder for a reproach .
What a strange thing love is !
Pray , what would become of us poor sailors ' wives , who often want to be conveyed to one port or another , after our husbands , if everybody had your feelings ?"
" I declare I cannot recollect what I was talking of .-- Oh !
Mrs . Palmer ' s information respecting Willoughby was not very material ; but any testimony in his favour , however small , was pleasing to her .
Such a letter was not to be soon recovered from .
His footsteps were heard along the gravel path ; in a moment he was in the passage , and in another he was before them .
" Such an imagination has crossed me , I own , Emma ; and if it never occurred to you before , you may as well take it into consideration now ."
She is loveliness itself .
" My dear , you are too particular ," said her husband .
I had known the Campbells a little in town ; and at Weymouth we were very much in the same set .
" Like him !"
I little thought then -- but no matter .
He is the very best young man -- But , my dear Jane , if you remember , I told you yesterday he was precisely the height of Mr . Perry .
Do you think he had the Elliot countenance ?
It would be a charming introduction for you , who have lived so secluded a life ; and I could immediately secure you some of the best society in the place .
Miss Woodhouse , do talk to me and make me comfortable again ."
dear !
He will be so pleased to see my little ones ."
She was too completely overpowered to be immediately able to reply : and two moments of silence being ample encouragement for Mr . Elton ' s sanguine state of mind , he tried to take her hand again , as he joyously exclaimed --
I do not know what she meant , but she asked me if I thought I should go and stay there again next summer ."
Every body must be aware that Miss Taylor must be missed , but every body ought also to be assured that Mr . and Mrs . Weston do really prevent our missing her by any means to the extent we ourselves anticipated -- which is the exact truth ."
The Musgroves came back to receive their happy boys and girls from school , bringing with them Mrs Harville ' s little children , to improve the noise of Uppercross , and lessen that of Lyme .
" Yes , very true ," cried Frank , " very true .
In the promotion of this object she was zealously active , as far as her ability reached ; and missed no opportunity of projecting weddings among all the young people of her acquaintance .
As it was , she instantly submitted , and with all the semblance of seeing nothing beyond ; and Anne , eager to escape farther notice , was impatient to know why Mrs Smith should have fancied she was to marry Mr Elliot ; where she could have received the idea , or from whom she could have heard it .
They must keep as much together as they could ;" and James was talked to , and given a charge to go very slow and wait for the other carriage .
The remaining five were left to their own powers , and Emma doubted their getting on very well ; for Mr . Knightley seemed little disposed for conversation ; Mrs . Elton was wanting notice , which nobody had inclination to pay , and she was herself in a worry of spirits which would have made her prefer being silent .
Dullness is as much produced within doors as without , by rain .
His imprudence had made her miserable for a while ; but it seemed to have deprived himself of all chance of ever being otherwise .
And as to Captain Wentworth ' s liking Louisa as well as Henrietta , it is nonsense to say so ; for he certainly does like Henrietta a great deal the best .
Why was it ?
" I thought Captain Benwick a very pleasing young man ," said Anne , " and I understand that he bears an excellent character ."
We three shall be able to go very well in my chaise ; and when we are in town , if you do not like to go wherever I do , well and good , you may always go with one of my daughters .
Then , there is a dove - cote , some delightful stew - ponds , and a very pretty canal ; and every thing , in short , that one could wish for ; and , moreover , it is close to the church , and only a quarter of a mile from the turnpike - road , so ' tis never dull , for if you only go and sit up in an old yew arbour behind the house , you may see all the carriages that pass along .
The contents of her last note to him were these :--
" Then I take it for granted ," observed Sir Walter , " that his face is about as orange as the cuffs and capes of my livery ."
Do not you think it is quite a mistaken point of conscience , when a clergyman sacrifices his health for the sake of duties , which may be just as well performed by another person ?
But your sister does not -- I think you said so -- she does not consider quite as you do ?"
He bestowed his hearty approbation however on their species of house .
She saw only that he was quiet and unobtrusive , and she liked him for it .
A word , a look , will be enough to decide whether I enter your father ' s house this evening or never ."
So suddenly to be gone !
Marianne looked again ; her heart sunk within her ; and abruptly turning round , she was hurrying back , when the voices of both her sisters were raised to detain her ; a third , almost as well known as Willoughby ' s , joined them in begging her to stop , and she turned round with surprise to see and welcome Edward Ferrars .
They had previously known embarrassments enough to try the friendship of their friends , and to prove that Mr Elliot ' s had better not be tried ; but it was not till his death that the wretched state of his affairs was fully known .
He would do any good to her , or her family ; but --"
How often have I heard you speak of it as such a compliment to her !"
She could not foresee that Colonel Brandon would give me a living ."
If attention , in future , could do away the past , she might hope to be forgiven .
" I hope so -- for at that time I was a fool ."
" I cannot , I cannot ," cried Marianne ; " leave me , leave me , if I distress you ; leave me , hate me , forget me !
Chapter 17
" Poor young man !"
I am sure you must have heard of her before .
Mr . Elton cared little about it , compared with his wife ; he only hoped " the young lady ' s pride would now be contented ;" and supposed " she had always meant to catch Knightley if she could ;" and , on the point of living at Hartfield , could daringly exclaim , " Rather he than I !"
I forget what it was now , but it was something so droll !"
I wish you could have heard her honouring your forbearance , in being able to pay her such attentions , as she was for ever receiving from yourself and your father , when her society must be so irksome ."
She was a woman rather of sound than of quick abilities , whose difficulties in coming to any decision in this instance were great , from the opposition of two leading principles .
" How much his business engrosses him already is very plain from the circumstance of his forgetting to inquire for the book you recommended .
" I would not wish to do any thing mean ," he replied .
I have brought my other son and daughter to see you .
If you remember any queernesses , set them all to the right account .-- Of the pianoforte so much talked of , I feel it only necessary to say , that its being ordered was absolutely unknown to Miss F --, who would never have allowed me to send it , had any choice been given her .-- The delicacy of her mind throughout the whole engagement , my dear madam , is much beyond my power of doing justice to .
A hasty and imprudent attachment may arise -- but there is generally time to recover from it afterwards .
I am sure she will be pleased with the children .
But his coming for me as he did , with such active , such ready friendship , is enough to prove him one of the worthiest of men ."
" Margaret ," said Marianne with great warmth , " you know that all this is an invention of your own , and that there is no such person in existence ."
Randalls is such a distance .
Emma was a good deal surprized ; but begged her to speak .
" True ," said Anne , " very true ; I did not recollect ; but what shall we say now , Captain Harville ?
But as I have always had a thoroughly good opinion of Miss Fairfax , I never could , under any blunder , have spoken ill of her ; and as to speaking ill of him , there I must have been safe ."
The circumstances , probably , which first opened your eyes to his character ."
She never did , you know .
What do you advise ?"
While you considered me as having sinned against Emma Woodhouse , I could deserve nothing from either .
He proved to me that he could afford it ; and that being the case , I was convinced he could not do better .
" If you were as much guided by nature in your estimate of men and women , and as little under the power of fancy and whim in your dealings with them , as you are where these children are concerned , we might always think alike ."
His eldest daughter ' s alarm was equal to his own .
CHAPTER XIII
" Nay , how could I help saying what I did ?-- Nobody could have helped it .
Emma ' s attempts to stop her father had been vain ; and when he had reached such a point as this , she could not wonder at her brother - in - law ' s breaking out .
But he is a pleasant , good humoured fellow , and has got the nicest little black bitch of a pointer I ever saw .
" And so you actually put this piece of court - plaister by for his sake !"
In spite of the improvements and additions which were making to the Norland estate , and in spite of its owner having once been within some thousand pounds of being obliged to sell out at a loss , nothing gave any symptom of that indigence which he had tried to infer from it ;-- no poverty of any kind , except of conversation , appeared -- but there , the deficiency was considerable .
These were charming feelings -- but not lasting .
Her mind was inevitably at liberty ; her thoughts could not be chained elsewhere ; and the past and the future , on a subject so interesting , must be before her , must force her attention , and engross her memory , her reflection , and her fancy .
She and the Harvilles came on Tuesday very safely , and in the evening we went to ask her how she did , when we were rather surprised not to find Captain Benwick of the party , for he had been invited as well as the Harvilles ; and what do you think was the reason ?
" I beg your pardon , my dear Miss Elliot ," she cried , in her natural tone of cordiality , " I beg your pardon for the short answers I have been giving you , but I have been uncertain what I ought to do .
She could not speak .
You have every body dearest to you always at hand , I , probably , never shall again ; and therefore till I have outlived all my affections , a post - office , I think , must always have power to draw me out , in worse weather than to - day ."
My business was to declare myself a scoundrel , and whether I did it with a bow or a bluster was of little importance .-- ' I am ruined for ever in their opinion --' said I to myself --' I am shut out for ever from their society , they already think me an unprincipled fellow , this letter will only make them think me a blackguard one .'
How delightful !"
For herself , she feared to move , lest she should be seen .
phoo !"
Something really important seemed announced by his looks ; but , as her friend was well , she endeavoured not to be uneasy , and settling it with her father , that she would take her walk now , she and Mr . Weston were soon out of the house together and on their way at a quick pace for Randalls .
I cannot pretend to remember it , but it was something very fine -- I overheard him telling Henrietta all about it ; and then ` Miss Elliot ' was spoken of in the highest terms !
" Your sister ," he continued , " has suffered dreadfully .
Mr . Woodhouse was almost as glad to see him now , as he would have been sorry to see him before .
He looked at her , as if wanting to read her thoughts .
They were indebted , the next day , to Charles Hayter , for all the minute knowledge of Louisa , which it was so essential to obtain every twenty - four hours .
It regarded a supper - room .
" I dare say ," returned Harriet , sighing again , " I dare say she was very much attached to him ."
Half an hour passed away , and the favourable symptom yet blessed her .
He had misinterpreted the feelings which had kept her face averted , and her tongue motionless .
Elizabeth , may we venture to present him and his wife in Laura Place ?"
CHAPTER 40
" I often feel concern ," said she , " that I dare not make our carriage more useful on such occasions .
He truly wants to marry you .
Emma encouraged her talkativeness -- amused by such a picture of another set of beings , and enjoying the youthful simplicity which could speak with so much exultation of Mrs . Martin ' s having " _two_ parlours , two very good parlours , indeed ; one of them quite as large as Mrs . Goddard ' s drawing - room ; and of her having an upper maid who had lived five - and - twenty years with her ; and of their having eight cows , two of them Alderneys , and one a little Welch cow , a very pretty little Welch cow indeed ; and of Mrs . Martin ' s saying as she was so fond of it , it should be called _her_ cow ; and of their having a very handsome summer - house in their garden , where some day next year they were all to drink tea :-- a very handsome summer - house , large enough to hold a dozen people ."
If she can hesitate as to ` Yes ,' she ought to say ` No ' directly .
I shall always have a great regard for the Miss Martins , especially Elizabeth , and should be very sorry to give them up , for they are quite as well educated as me .
Brandon will be jealous , if she does not take care ."
But she had believed them to be well - meaning , worthy people before ; and what difference did this make in the evils of the connexion ?
Many had looked on each other , and many had repeated the name , before all this had been got through , even by the smart rapidity of a waiter .
I assure you they are very genteel people .
Altogether , they will have five hundred a - year amongst them , and what on earth can four women want for more than that ?-- They will live so cheap !
There is a quickness of perception in some , a nicety in the discernment of character , a natural penetration , in short , which no experience in others can equal , and Lady Russell had been less gifted in this part of understanding than her young friend .
He paid her only the compliment of attention ; and she felt a respect for him on the occasion , which the others had reasonably forfeited by their shameless want of taste .
" I kept my letter open , that I might send you word how Louisa bore her journey , and now I am extremely glad I did , having a great deal to add .
" In all these cases , there are established usages which make everything plain and easy between landlord and tenant .
Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax , escorted by the two gentlemen , walked into the room ; and Mrs . Elton seemed to think it as much her duty as Mrs . Weston ' s to receive them .
It has been , and is , and probably will always be a heavy misfortune to me , that I have had no necessary business to engage me , no profession to give me employment , or afford me any thing like independence .
" No , no , no , it cannot be ," she cried ; " she cannot feel .
But , as it was , she only learned , from some very significant looks , how far their penetration , founded on Margaret ' s instructions , extended .
The evil is now irremediable , and it has been entirely your own doing .
their luxury and ease .
He gave her to understand that Frank admired her extremely -- thought her very beautiful and very charming ; and with so much to be said for him altogether , she found she must not judge him harshly .
He would have had a wife of whose temper he could make no complaint , but he would have been always necessitous -- always poor ; and probably would soon have learned to rank the innumerable comforts of a clear estate and good income as of far more importance , even to domestic happiness , than the mere temper of a wife ."
All that could be done was , to sit down at that end of the counter which seemed to promise the quickest succession ; one gentleman only was standing there , and it is probable that Elinor was not without hope of exciting his politeness to a quicker despatch .
" No , no , you must not ; you shall not , indeed ."
He is just Lady Russell ' s sort .
But for this strange kind of secrecy maintained by them relative to their engagement , which in fact concealed nothing at all , she could not account ; and it was so wholly contradictory to their general opinions and practice , that a doubt sometimes entered her mind of their being really engaged , and this doubt was enough to prevent her making any inquiry of Marianne .
Three months , she says so , positively , as I am going to have the pleasure of reading to you .
That is , _I_ always had a strong persuasion he would be here again soon , I was sure something favourable would turn up -- but nobody believed me .
THIS morning I had fully intended to call on you , if I could possibly find a spare half hour , but one has always so much to do on first coming to town .
and that we were most particularly asked to meet Lady Dalrymple and her daughter , and Mr Elliot , and all the principal family connexions , on purpose to be introduced to them ?
With regard to herself , it was now a matter of unconcern whether she went to town or not , and when she saw her mother so thoroughly pleased with the plan , and her sister exhilarated by it in look , voice , and manner , restored to all her usual animation , and elevated to more than her usual gaiety , she could not be dissatisfied with the cause , and would hardly allow herself to distrust the consequence .
I am sure I had not .
My poor Charles , who had the finest , most generous spirit in the world , would have divided his last farthing with him ; and I know that his purse was open to him ; I know that he often assisted him ."
It was a child ' s play , chosen to conceal a deeper game on Frank Churchill ' s part .
Oh !
Anne could do no more ; but her heart prophesied some mischance to damp the perfection of her felicity .
When the plan was made known to Mary , however , there was an end of all peace in it .
We do not like our lodgings here the worse , I can tell you , for putting us in mind of those we first had at North Yarmouth .
Mrs Musgrove was of a comfortable , substantial size , infinitely more fitted by nature to express good cheer and good humour , than tenderness and sentiment ; and while the agitations of Anne ' s slender form , and pensive face , may be considered as very completely screened , Captain Wentworth should be allowed some credit for the self - command with which he attended to her large fat sighings over the destiny of a son , whom alive nobody had cared for .
" Of course ," said Mary , " you will mention our seeing Mr Elliot , the next time you write to Bath .
yes -- she will have her own room , of course ; the room she always has ;-- and there is the nursery for the children ,-- just as usual , you know .
She was sorry , but could not repent .
Such scarecrows as the streets were full of !
She learned that ( the intimacy between them continuing unimpaired by Mr Elliot ' s marriage ) they had been as before always together , and Mr Elliot had led his friend into expenses much beyond his fortune .
" No , he is not so unworthy as you believe him .
said she , on his taking Miss Steeles ' s pocket handkerchief , and throwing it out of window --" He is full of monkey tricks ."
I am sure she will be as happy to see her friends at Highbury , as they can be to see her .
She was out ; and I felt it impossible not to wait till she came in .
A single woman , with a very narrow income , must be a ridiculous , disagreeable old maid !
" A well - looking man ," said Sir Walter , " a very well - looking man ."
When the distressing communication at Uppercross was over , and he had seen the father and mother quite as composed as could be hoped , and the daughter all the better for being with them , he announced his intention of returning in the same carriage to Lyme ; and when the horses were baited , he was off .
" Brother and sister !
" Oh !
There was so much attachment to Captain Wentworth in all this , and such a bewitching charm in a degree of hospitality so uncommon , so unlike the usual style of give - and - take invitations , and dinners of formality and display , that Anne felt her spirits not likely to be benefited by an increasing acquaintance among his brother - officers .
Considering how very handsome she is , she appears to be little occupied with it ; her vanity lies another way .
I hope it does him some service with you ."
Knightley !-- Mr .
And , in fact , you have heard all the essential already .
cried Mr . John Knightley , hearing his own name .
" Well , my dear , ' tis a true saying about an ill - wind , for it will be all the better for Colonel Brandon .
Mrs . Jennings was very warm in her praise of Edward ' s conduct , but only Elinor and Marianne understood its true merit .
It is what I always protested against for my children .
And he was really a very pleasing young man , a young man whom any woman not fastidious might like .
Lady Russell confessed she had expected something better ; but yet " it was an acquaintance worth having ;" and when Anne ventured to speak her opinion of them to Mr Elliot , he agreed to their being nothing in themselves , but still maintained that , as a family connexion , as good company , as those who would collect good company around them , they had their value .
She knew not that she had been the means of sending the owners of Cleveland away , in about seven days from the time of their arrival .
These days of confinement would have been , but for her private perplexities , remarkably comfortable , as such seclusion exactly suited her brother , whose feelings must always be of great importance to his companions ; and he had , besides , so thoroughly cleared off his ill - humour at Randalls , that his amiableness never failed him during the rest of his stay at Hartfield .
I wonder what curacy he will get !-- Good gracious !
He knew of no one but Mrs . Goddard to whom he could apply for information of her relations or friends .
" Marianne has not shyness to excuse any inattention of hers ," said Elinor .
Chapter 4
The public pays and must be served well ."
Why she did not like Jane Fairfax might be a difficult question to answer ; Mr . Knightley had once told her it was because she saw in her the really accomplished young woman , which she wanted to be thought herself ; and though the accusation had been eagerly refuted at the time , there were moments of self - examination in which her conscience could not quite acquit her .
Mrs . Ferrars is a charming woman , and so is your sister .
In her mother she lost the only person able to cope with her .
From a night of more sleep than she had expected , Marianne awoke the next morning to the same consciousness of misery in which she had closed her eyes .
In short , I have made a match between Mr . Knightley and Jane Fairfax .
What a blessing it is , when undue influence does not survive the grave !-- He gave his consent with very little persuasion ."
" How strange this is !
" Ah !
" They are up stairs with my sister : they will be down in a few moments , I dare say ," had been Anne ' s reply , in all the confusion that was natural ; and if the child had not called her to come and do something for him , she would have been out of the room the next moment , and released Captain Wentworth as well as herself .
Your inexperience really amuses me !
In short , it is a kind of thing that "-- lowering his voice to an important whisper --" will be exceedingly welcome to ALL PARTIES ."
Mrs . Smallridge , a most delightful woman !-- A style of living almost equal to Maple Grove -- and as to the children , except the little Sucklings and little Bragges , there are not such elegant sweet children anywhere .
She was most thankful for her own knowledge of him .
I am afraid you must have suffered from the shock , and the more from its not overpowering you at the time ."
How I shall laugh !
In every meeting of the kind Willoughby was included ; and the ease and familiarity which naturally attended these parties were exactly calculated to give increasing intimacy to his acquaintance with the Dashwoods , to afford him opportunity of witnessing the excellencies of Marianne , of marking his animated admiration of her , and of receiving , in her behaviour to himself , the most pointed assurance of her affection .
Nothing but a country curate .
Mrs . Dixon , I understand , has no remarkable degree of personal beauty ; is not , by any means , to be compared with Miss Fairfax ."
She wished him to speak , but he would not .
She was always on friendly terms with her brother - in - law ; and in the children , who loved her nearly as well , and respected her a great deal more than their mother , she had an object of interest , amusement , and wholesome exertion .
" Pity me , dear Miss Dashwood !"
I believe the reverse .
I know they will ; but I am sure I would not do such a thing for all the world .-- ' La !'
It was there our acquaintance begun , for my sister and me was often staying with my uncle , and it was there our engagement was formed , though not till a year after he had quitted as a pupil ; but he was almost always with us afterwards .
But Mr Elliot was not done with .
To look at her , nobody would think how delighted and happy she is to have secured such a situation .
Most unwilling was she to awaken from such a dream of felicity to comprehend all the unhappy truths which attended the affair ; and for some time she refused to submit to them .
Emma spoke for her .
I never hear better sense from any one than Robert Martin .
" I remember last Christmas at a little hop at the park , he danced from eight o ' clock till four , without once sitting down ."
she repeated to herself again and again , in nervous gratitude .
" Perry !"
" That is to say ," cried Marianne contemptuously , " he has told you , that in the East Indies the climate is hot , and the mosquitoes are troublesome ."
" He ought to come ," said Emma .
Emma smiled and answered --" My visit was of use to the nervous part of her complaint , I hope ; but not even I can charm away a sore throat ; it is a most severe cold indeed .
Well , Miss Elliot ," ( lowering his voice ,) " as I was saying we shall never agree , I suppose , upon this point .
" To be sure I did ; very often .
" Yes , sir , I did indeed ; and I am very much obliged by your kind solicitude about me ."
cried Mrs . Dashwood as she entered --" is she ill ?"
.
Mr . Elton , in very good spirits , was one of the first to walk in .
How could you suppose me ignorant ?
" Aye , that ' s very just , indeed , that ' s very properly said .
You know enough of him to do justice to his solid worth .
" My mother ' s deafness is very trifling you see -- just nothing at all .
Mrs . Dashwood was denied ; but before the carriage could turn from the house , her husband accidentally came out .
He has changed his hour of going , I suppose , that is all , or I may be mistaken , I might not attend ;" and walked back to her chair , recomposed , and with the comfortable hope of having acquitted herself well .
But she shall forgive me again , and on more reasonable grounds .-- NOW will you listen to me ?"
She should then have heard more : Mrs . Weston would speak to her , with a degree of unreserve which she would not hazard with Isabella ; and , she really believed , would scarcely try to conceal any thing relative to the Churchills from her , excepting those views on the young man , of which her own imagination had already given her such instinctive knowledge .
if you were to see what a headache she has .
These were her internal persuasions : " Old fashioned notions ; country hospitality ; we do not profess to give dinners ; few people in Bath do ; Lady Alicia never does ; did not even ask her own sister ' s family , though they were here a month : and I dare say it would be very inconvenient to Mrs Musgrove ; put her quite out of her way .
Good old Mrs . Bates -- I will call upon her to - morrow , and take my children .-- They are always so pleased to see my children .-- And that excellent Miss Bates !-- such thorough worthy people !-- How are they , sir ?"
He left her house yesterday , but where he is gone , or whether he is still in town , I do not know ; for WE of course can make no inquiry ."
The openness and heartiness of her manner more than atoned for that want of recollection and elegance which made her often deficient in the forms of politeness ; her kindness , recommended by so pretty a face , was engaging ; her folly , though evident was not disgusting , because it was not conceited ; and Elinor could have forgiven every thing but her laugh .
Lord !
But I can remember nothing ;-- not even that particular riddle which you have heard me mention ; I can only recollect the first stanza ; and there are several .
But there are hopes of her being forgiven in time .
Anne wondered whether it ever occurred to him now , to question the justness of his own previous opinion as to the universal felicity and advantage of firmness of character ; and whether it might not strike him that , like all other qualities of the mind , it should have its proportions and limits .
She was safely down , and instantly , to show her enjoyment , ran up the steps to be jumped down again .
" You must make my apologies to your friend ; but so good a charade must not be confined to one or two .
allow me to interpret this interesting silence .
Her height was pretty , just such as almost every body would think tall , and nobody could think very tall ; her figure particularly graceful ; her size a most becoming medium , between fat and thin , though a slight appearance of ill - health seemed to point out the likeliest evil of the two .
" His name is Ferrars ," said he , in a very audible whisper ; " but pray do not tell it , for it ' s a great secret ."
The house was handsome , and handsomely fitted up , and the young ladies were immediately put in possession of a very comfortable apartment .
Or a trident ?
Pratt ?"
aye , I know your scruples .
So , I made free to wish her joy ."
Her first return was to resume her place in the modern and elegant apartments of the Lodge , and to gladden the eyes of its mistress .
Charles and Henrietta returned , bringing , as may be conjectured , Charles Hayter with them .
She was without any power , because she was without any desire of command over herself .
Her eyes were red and swollen ; and it seemed as if her tears were even then restrained with difficulty .
After a good many compliments to Jane on her dress and look , compliments very quietly and properly taken , Mrs . Elton was evidently wanting to be complimented herself -- and it was , " How do you like my gown ?-- How do you like my trimming ?-- How has Wright done my hair ?"
More than seven years were gone since this little history of sorrowful interest had reached its close ; and time had softened down much , perhaps nearly all of peculiar attachment to him , but she had been too dependent on time alone ; no aid had been given in change of place ( except in one visit to Bath soon after the rupture ), or in any novelty or enlargement of society .
I am resolved to have some in an ornament for the head .
But " they should meet again .
" Ah !
Charles , Henrietta , and Captain Wentworth were the three in consultation , and for a little while it was only an interchange of perplexity and terror .
But before she was half way upstairs she heard the parlour door open , and , turning round , was astonished to see Edward himself come out .
convinced her that he had nothing more to say or surmise about Hartfield .
Is he a man of fortune ?"
" The clerks grow expert from habit .-- They must begin with some quickness of sight and hand , and exercise improves them .
You persuaded her to refuse him ."
Nothing can be like it , to be sure !
If the violence of her passions , the weakness of her understanding -- I do not mean , however , to defend myself .
She pondered , but could think of nothing .
Marianne was of no use on these occasions , as she would never learn the game ; but though her time was therefore at her own disposal , the evening was by no means more productive of pleasure to her than to Elinor , for it was spent in all the anxiety of expectation and the pain of disappointment .
I am not in the least ashamed of my meaning ."
Willoughby ?"
It happened to catch Sophia ' s eye before it caught mine -- and its size , the elegance of the paper , the hand - writing altogether , immediately gave her a suspicion .
It had that appearance .
" This will probably be the case ," he replied ; " and yet there is something so amiable in the prejudices of a young mind , that one is sorry to see them give way to the reception of more general opinions ."
Now , it would be really having Frank in their neighbourhood .
You mentioned it as what was certainly to be very soon .
The minutiae of the business Anne could not attempt to understand ; even Captain Wentworth did not seem admitted to perfect confidence here ; but that there had been a withdrawing on the gentleman ' s side , and a relenting on the lady ' s , and that they were now very glad to be together again , did not admit a doubt .
" Do come with me ," said Mrs . Weston , " if it be not very disagreeable to you .
My mother was quite sick of it .
The good sense of Colonel and Mrs . Campbell could not oppose such a resolution , though their feelings did .
It sometimes happens that a woman is handsomer at twenty - nine than she was ten years before ; and , generally speaking , if there has been neither ill health nor anxiety , it is a time of life at which scarcely any charm is lost .
Selina says it is quite horror to her -- and I believe I have caught a little of her nicety .
" I must go , uncertain of my fate ; but I shall return hither , or follow your party , as soon as possible .
" Mr . Edward Ferrars , the eldest son of Mrs . Ferrars , of Park Street , and brother of your sister - in - law , Mrs . John Dashwood , is the person I mean ; you must allow that I am not likely to be deceived as to the name of the man on who all my happiness depends ."
His attendance was by this means secured , and the rest followed in course .
Mrs . Weston begs you to put on your tippet .
are we to have the pleasure of a call from Mr .
Elinor found that he and Fanny had been in town two days .
What his pursuits , his talents , and genius ?"
I am sure I am not extravagant in my demands .
I walk : I prefer walking ."
Some inconvenience to your friends , indeed , might result from it -- you would not be able to give them so much of your time .
But some of those little attentions and encouragements which ladies can so easily give will fix him , in spite of himself .
Now , pray do ,-- and come while the Westons are with us .
" What is the matter now ?"
" Leave it to me .
There is not a stone laid of Fanny ' s green - house , and nothing but the plan of the flower - garden marked out ."
But it was then too late , and with a countenance meaning to be open , she sat down again and talked of the weather .
The person is not tall enough for him , and has not his air ."
She was earnestly begged to return and dine , and give them all the rest of the day , but her spirits had been so long exerted that at present she felt unequal to more , and fit only for home , where she might be sure of being as silent as she chose .
You have only knowledge enough of the language to translate at sight these inverted , transposed , curtailed Italian lines , into clear , comprehensible , elegant English .
That had begun to operate in the very hour of first meeting her in Bath ; that had returned , after a short suspension , to ruin the concert ; and that had influenced him in everything he had said and done , or omitted to say and do , in the last four - and - twenty hours .
In the mean time , till all these alterations could be made from the savings of an income of five hundred a - year by a woman who never saved in her life , they were wise enough to be contented with the house as it was ; and each of them was busy in arranging their particular concerns , and endeavoring , by placing around them books and other possessions , to form themselves a home .
Donwell and Randalls had received their invitation , and none had come for her father and herself ; and Mrs . Weston ' s accounting for it with " I suppose they will not take the liberty with you ; they know you do not dine out ," was not quite sufficient .
The first act was over .
" But you need not imagine Mr . Weston to have felt what you would feel in giving up Henry or John .
Mr . Knightley was fortunate in every body ' s most ready concurrence .
" If we can persuade your father to all this ," said Lady Russell , looking over her paper , " much may be done .
There were wishes at Randalls respecting Emma ' s destiny , but it was not desirable to have them suspected ; and the quiet transition which Mr . Knightley soon afterwards made to " What does Weston think of the weather ; shall we have rain ?"
After much thinking , she could determine on nothing better , than Harriet ' s returning the visit ; but in a way that , if they had understanding , should convince them that it was to be only a formal acquaintance .
There was deep consciousness about him , and he found it easier to meet her eye than her friend ' s .
cried Harriet .
The pain of his continued residence in Highbury , however , must certainly be lessened by his marriage .
You cannot mean that he has even proposed to her again -- yet .
Pass Mr . E ., Knightley , Jane , and myself .
And before she was beyond the first stage of full sensation , Charles , Mary , and Henrietta all came in .
I am sure they will bring him soon ."
He was devoted to Henrietta ; always turning towards her ; and when he spoke at all , always with the view of supporting her hopes and raising her spirits .
He had not seen Louisa ; and was so extremely fearful of any ill consequence to her from an interview , that he did not press for it at all ; and , on the contrary , seemed to have a plan of going away for a week or ten days , till her head was stronger .
No , if he had believed me at all to share his feelings , he would not have been so wretched .
Why Mr . Ferrars was to have been written to about it in such a hurry , she could not immediately comprehend .
to be a second time the dupe of her misconceptions and flattery .
She could imagine what Louisa was feeling .
Ay , it is but too true .
How eloquent could Anne Elliot have been !
Marianne gave a violent start , fixed her eyes upon Elinor , saw her turning pale , and fell back in her chair in hysterics .
How was Anne to set all these matters to rights ?
" And who knows but you may raise a dance ," said she .
Mr . Weston entered into the idea with thorough enjoyment , and Mrs . Weston most willingly undertook to play as long as they could wish to dance ; and the interesting employment had followed , of reckoning up exactly who there would be , and portioning out the indispensable division of space to every couple .
Lord of the earth and sea , he bends a slave , And woman , lovely woman , reigns alone .
How would he bear to have Miss Bates belonging to him ?-- To have her haunting the Abbey , and thanking him all day long for his great kindness in marrying Jane ?-- ` So very kind and obliging !-- But he always had been such a very kind neighbour !'
So she thought at first ;-- but a little consideration convinced her that every thing need not be put off .
Lucy does not want sense , and that is the foundation on which every thing good may be built .-- And after all , Marianne , after all that is bewitching in the idea of a single and constant attachment , and all that can be said of one ' s happiness depending entirely on any particular person , it is not meant -- it is not fit -- it is not possible that it should be so .-- Edward will marry Lucy ; he will marry a woman superior in person and understanding to half her sex ; and time and habit will teach him to forget that he ever thought another superior to HER ."
To quit the neighbourhood of Norland was no longer an evil ; it was an object of desire ; it was a blessing , in comparison of the misery of continuing her daughter - in - law ' s guest ; and to remove for ever from that beloved place would be less painful than to inhabit or visit it while such a woman was its mistress .
they care no more about such things !--"
Marianne ' s indignation burst forth as soon as he quitted the room ; and as her vehemence made reserve impossible in Elinor , and unnecessary in Mrs . Jennings , they all joined in a very spirited critique upon the party .
" I am afraid it is but too true ," said Marianne ; " but why should you boast of it ?"
I have engaged Captain Wentworth .
Miss Woodhouse , believe me I have not the presumption to suppose -- Indeed I am not so mad .-- But it is a pleasure to me to admire him at a distance -- and to think of his infinite superiority to all the rest of the world , with the gratitude , wonder , and veneration , which are so proper , in me especially ."
" Mrs . Ferrars has never yet mentioned Edward ' s name , which does not surprise us ; but , to our great astonishment , not a line has been received from him on the occasion .
As she thought less of his inebriety , she thought more of his inconstancy and presumption ; and with fewer struggles for politeness , replied ,
Vanity , while seeking its own guilty triumph at the expense of another , had involved him in a real attachment , which extravagance , or at least its offspring , necessity , had required to be sacrificed .
The constant attention of Mr . and Mrs . Henry Dashwood to his wishes , which proceeded not merely from interest , but from goodness of heart , gave him every degree of solid comfort which his age could receive ; and the cheerfulness of the children added a relish to his existence .
When he came away , she was going to walk out with Captain Benwick , which , he hoped , would do her good .
Perhaps it would have been as well if he had left it wholly to myself .
" And yet I do assure you ," replied Lucy , her little sharp eyes full of meaning , " there seemed to me to be a coldness and displeasure in your manner that made me quite uncomfortable .
Captain Benwick looked , and was , the youngest of the three , and , compared with either of them , a little man .
" Uppercross , the necessity of some one ' s going to Uppercross ; the news to be conveyed ; how it could be broken to Mr and Mrs Musgrove ; the lateness of the morning ; an hour already gone since they ought to have been off ; the impossibility of being in tolerable time ."
I went .
" Oh !
" I do not believe any such thing ," replied Emma .--" I am persuaded that you can be as insincere as your neighbours , when it is necessary ; but there is no reason to suppose the instrument is indifferent .
This increased the mirth of the company , and Margaret was eagerly pressed to say something more .
He had frequently observed , as he walked , that one handsome face would be followed by thirty , or five - and - thirty frights ; and once , as he had stood in a shop on Bond Street , he had counted eighty - seven women go by , one after another , without there being a tolerable face among them .
Poor little creatures , how unhappy she would have made them !"
I do not require you to adopt all my suspicions , though you make so noble a profession of doing it , but I honestly tell you what they are ."
If it were to be shared with the woman he loved , he could not think any man to be pitied for having that house .
She could not be silent when such points were introduced , and she had neither shyness nor reserve in their discussion .
To take her -- be it only an hour or two -- from her aunt , to give her change of air and scene , and quiet rational conversation , even for an hour or two , might do her good ; and the following morning she wrote again to say , in the most feeling language she could command , that she would call for her in the carriage at any hour that Jane would name -- mentioning that she had Mr . Perry ' s decided opinion , in favour of such exercise for his patient .
Everybody has a way of their own .
" Ay , to be sure , I thought as much .
Anne was astonished to recognise the same hills and the same objects so soon .
I dare say there was a difference when I was staying with them the other day .
Miss Woodhouse , I would rather done any thing than have it happen : and yet , you know , there was a sort of satisfaction in seeing him behave so pleasantly and so kindly .
His coming to visit his father had been often talked of but never achieved .
in a tone that implied --" do you really think him selfish ?"
She read it to him , just as he liked to have any thing read , slowly and distinctly , and two or three times over , with explanations of every part as she proceeded -- and he was very much pleased , and , as she had foreseen , especially struck with the complimentary conclusion .
Now , according to my idea of Mrs . Churchill , it would be most natural , that while she makes no sacrifice for the comfort of the husband , to whom she owes every thing , while she exercises incessant caprice towards _him_ , she should frequently be governed by the nephew , to whom she owes nothing at all ."
She could not imagine a man more exactly what he ought to be than Mr Elliot ; nor did she ever enjoy a sweeter feeling than the hope of seeing him receive the hand of her beloved Anne in Kellynch church , in the course of the following autumn .
Did you ever see the like ?
Am I reserved , Marianne ?"
CHAPTER XVIII
Elton , and Miss Hawkins !-- Good morning to you ."
" Since the idea had been started in the very quarter which ought to dictate , he had no scruple ," he said , " in confessing his judgement to be entirely on that side .
On Elinor its effect was very different .
" No bad news , Colonel , I hope ;" said Mrs . Jennings , as soon as he entered the room .
A valuable legacy indeed !
I would much rather have been merry than wise ."
Mrs . Jennings , Lady Middleton ' s mother , was a good - humoured , merry , fat , elderly woman , who talked a great deal , seemed very happy , and rather vulgar .
" No , Edward , I should have something else to do with it ."
dashing about with his curricle and hunters !
-- Ford ' s was the principal woollen - draper , linen - draper , and haberdasher ' s shop united ; the shop first in size and fashion in the place .--" And so , there she had set , without an idea of any thing in the world , full ten minutes , perhaps -- when , all of a sudden , who should come in -- to be sure it was so very odd !-- but they always dealt at Ford ' s -- who should come in , but Elizabeth Martin and her brother !-- Dear Miss Woodhouse !
With this treatment , Mr . Woodhouse was soon composed enough for talking as usual .
He had caught both substance and shadow -- both fortune and affection , and was just the happy man he ought to be ; talking only of himself and his own concerns -- expecting to be congratulated -- ready to be laughed at -- and , with cordial , fearless smiles , now addressing all the young ladies of the place , to whom , a few weeks ago , he would have been more cautiously gallant .
Lucy continued .
Elinor could sit it no longer .
In short , I can feel no dependence on his coming , and I wish Mr . Weston were less sanguine ."
Every thing so good !"
Neither Lady Russell nor Mr Elliot could admire the letter ; but it did all that was wanted , in bringing three lines of scrawl from the Dowager Viscountess .
but her lips were closed .
" Yes , papa ; we have something to read you , something quite fresh .
" Indeed , Ma ' am ," said Elinor , very seriously , " you are mistaken .
As soon , however , as the consciousness of all this was forced by continual repetition on Marianne , she could stay no longer .
But as to my _letting_ her marry Robert Martin , it is impossible ; she has refused him , and so decidedly , I think , as must prevent any second application .
But there is nobody hereabouts to attach her ; and she goes so seldom from home ."
He listened with all due deference ; acknowledged that he had heard many people say the same -- but yet he must confess , that to him nothing could make amends for the want of the fine glow of health .
She looked down the Randalls road .
But Miss Bates soon came --" Very happy and obliged "-- but Emma ' s conscience told her that there was not the same cheerful volubility as before -- less ease of look and manner .
Colonel Brandon ' s horses were announced .
` Why , to be sure , ma ' am ,' said she , ` it would not prevent his marrying anybody else .'
I am here till claimed by Colonel and Mrs .
They seemed more like cheerful , easy friends , than lovers .
I shall be at your service in half a minute ."
This remark was not calculated to make Edward or Elinor more easy , nor to conciliate the good will of Lucy , who looked up at Marianne with no very benignant expression .
` You and I must part .
" No .
" Certainly , ma ' am ," replied Elinor , not hearing much of what she said , and more anxious to be alone , than to be mistress of the subject .
I owe such a grudge to myself for the stupid , rascally folly of my own heart , that all my past sufferings under it are only triumph and exultation to me now .
" We shall never agree upon this question ," Captain Harville was beginning to say , when a slight noise called their attention to Captain Wentworth ' s hitherto perfectly quiet division of the room .
So well had they recommended themselves to Lady Middleton , so agreeable had their assiduities made them to her , that though Lucy was certainly not so elegant , and her sister not even genteel , she was as ready as Sir John to ask them to spend a week or two in Conduit Street ; and it happened to be particularly convenient to the Miss Steeles , as soon as the Dashwoods ' invitation was known , that their visit should begin a few days before the party took place .
" Granting your assertion that the world does all this so soon for men ( which , however , I do not think I shall grant ), it does not apply to Benwick .
Sir John and Lady Middleton wished it very much .
What can you suppose ?"
I compare it with what it ought to have been ; I compare it with yours ."
I should like to see Emma in love , and in some doubt of a return ; it would do her good .
No ; he would never disgrace his name so far .
It does not come to me in quite so direct a line as that ; it takes a bend or two , but nothing of consequence .
When Mr . Weston joined the party , however , and when the baby was fetched , there was no longer a want of subject or animation -- or of courage and opportunity for Frank Churchill to draw near her and say ,
Towards her husband and mother she was the same as to them ; and intimacy was therefore neither to be looked for nor desired .
They saw him step into his carriage , and in a minute it was out of sight .
" And so , I made her go .
As it is , without any addition of mine , they will each have about three thousand pounds on their mother ' s death -- a very comfortable fortune for any young woman ."
No , it was not regret which made Anne ' s heart beat in spite of herself , and brought the colour into her cheeks when she thought of Captain Wentworth unshackled and free .
" But they like it , papa ; there is nothing they like so much .
But pray , Colonel , how came you to conjure out that I should be in town today ?"
Not heard of you !-- I believe Mrs . Weston ' s letters lately have been full of very little else than Mrs .
There is not a room in this cottage that will hold ten couple , and where can the supper be ?'
" Well , now you shall hear something that will surprise you .
" Did you ever see such a skin ?-- such smoothness !
Mr . Elton was the very person fixed on by Emma for driving the young farmer out of Harriet ' s head .
However , _I_ shall always think it a very pleasant party , and feel extremely obliged to the kind friends who included me in it ."
A few minutes more , and Emma hoped to see one troublesome companion deposited in his own house , to get sober and cool , and the other recover his temper and happiness when this visit of hardship were over .
It did seem , last autumn , as if there were an attachment between him and Louisa Musgrove ; but I hope it may be understood to have worn out on each side equally , and without violence .
And she is a good - natured woman after all .
He was a blessing to all the juvenile part of the neighbourhood , for in summer he was for ever forming parties to eat cold ham and chicken out of doors , and in winter his private balls were numerous enough for any young lady who was not suffering under the unsatiable appetite of fifteen .
" Dear me !
But still , there certainly were a dreadful multitude of ugly women in Bath ; and as for the men !
Pass us , if you please , Mr . Churchill .
How would it all be ?
It is rather from feeling how impossible it is , with all one ' s efforts , and all one ' s sacrifices , to make the accommodations on board such as women ought to have .
Edward was allowed to retain the privilege of first comer , and Colonel Brandon therefore walked every night to his old quarters at the Park ; from whence he usually returned in the morning , early enough to interrupt the lovers ' first tete - a - tete before breakfast .
" He is a rear admiral of the white .
Sometimes he won ' t speak to me for half a day together , and then he comes out with something so droll -- all about any thing in the world ."
She was assisted , however , by that perfect indifference and apparent unconsciousness , among the only three of her own friends in the secret of the past , which seemed almost to deny any recollection of it .
As a sort of touchstone , however , she began to speak of his kindness in conveying the aunt and niece ; and though his answer was in the spirit of cutting the matter short , she believed it to indicate only his disinclination to dwell on any kindness of his own .
It was driven by a servant in mourning .
" To have resisted such attractions , to have withstood such tenderness !-- Is there a man on earth who could have done it ?-- Yes , I found myself , by insensible degrees , sincerely fond of her ; and the happiest hours of my life were what I spent with her when I felt my intentions were strictly honourable , and my feelings blameless .
Harriet had not been at home ; but a note had been prepared and left for her , written in the very style to touch ; a small mixture of reproach , with a great deal of kindness ; and till Mr . Elton himself appeared , she had been much occupied by it , continually pondering over what could be done in return , and wishing to do more than she dared to confess .
She was vexed beyond what could have been expressed -- almost beyond what she could conceal .
" So do I , Anne ," said Charles .
She instantly saw that her ears had not deceived her .
Her happiness was from within .
Observe the turn of her throat .
Lady Russell listened , and looked , and made only this cautious reply :--" Elizabeth !
" I am not sorry to see you alone ," he replied , " for I have a good deal to say to you .
She was faithful to her word ; and when Willoughby called at the cottage , the same day , Elinor heard her express her disappointment to him in a low voice , on being obliged to forego the acceptance of his present .
" I am sorry to say that I am very far from well ; and Jemima has just told me that the butcher says there is a bad sore - throat very much about .
For Marianne , however -- in spite of his incivility in surviving her loss -- he always retained that decided regard which interested him in every thing that befell her , and made her his secret standard of perfection in woman ;-- and many a rising beauty would be slighted by him in after - days as bearing no comparison with Mrs . Brandon .
I know that such a girl as Harriet is exactly what every man delights in -- what at once bewitches his senses and satisfies his judgment .
Chapter 9
" Nothing can be going on better than the child ," said he ; " so I told my father , just now , that I would come , and he thought me quite right .
She could not bear to see him suffering , to know him fancying himself neglected ; and though her understanding almost acquiesced in the assurance of both the Mr . Knightleys , that when once the event were over , his distress would be soon over too , she hesitated -- she could not proceed .
You were a large party in yourselves , and you wanted nothing beyond ."
" All this , however ," he continued , " was urged in vain .
-- All idle refinement !
" For when a lady ' s in the case , " You know all other things give place ."
That would be a noble thing , indeed , for Henrietta !
Mrs Croft always met her with a kindness which gave her the pleasure of fancying herself a favourite , and on the present occasion , receiving her in that house , there was particular attention .
That was the kind action ; that was the noble benevolence and generosity ; that was the service which made me begin to feel how superior he was to every other being upon earth ."
" I am quite easy on that head ," replied Mrs . Weston .
" She is a sort of elegant creature that one cannot keep one ' s eyes from .
" A strong mind , with sweetness of manner ," made the first and the last of the description .
Emma watched her through the fluctuations of this speech , and saw no alarming symptoms of love .
if you knew !-- And can you believe me to be so , while I see you so wretched !"
It was Miss Taylor ' s loss which first brought grief .
Not that I imagine he can think I have been encouraging him hitherto .
" I have reason to think ," he replied , " that Harriet Smith will soon have an offer of marriage , and from a most unexceptionable quarter :-- Robert Martin is the man .
" So early in life -- at three - and - twenty -- a period when , if a man chuses a wife , he generally chuses ill . At three - and - twenty to have drawn such a prize !
The child had a good night , and was going on well the next day .
They must be separated ; but there was a great deal of pain in the process -- so much to herself at this time , that she soon felt the necessity of a little consolation , and resolved on going home by way of Randalls to procure it .
She was thinking only of the last half hour , and as they passed to their seats , her mind took a hasty range over it .
Knightley must not marry !-- You would not have little Henry cut out from Donwell ?-- Oh !
Margaret agreed , and they pursued their way against the wind , resisting it with laughing delight for about twenty minutes longer , when suddenly the clouds united over their heads , and a driving rain set full in their face .-- Chagrined and surprised , they were obliged , though unwillingly , to turn back , for no shelter was nearer than their own house .
She saw them in an instant in their parsonage - house ; saw in Lucy , the active , contriving manager , uniting at once a desire of smart appearance with the utmost frugality , and ashamed to be suspected of half her economical practices ;-- pursuing her own interest in every thought , courting the favour of Colonel Brandon , of Mrs . Jennings , and of every wealthy friend .
At last , it became necessary to speak of her .
The anxious interval wore away unproductively .
They had not long finished their breakfast before Mrs . Palmer ' s barouche stopped at the door , and in a few minutes she came laughing into the room : so delighted to see them all , that it was hard to say whether she received most pleasure from meeting her mother or the Miss Dashwoods again .
Mr . Woodhouse taken from Hartfield !-- No , he felt that it ought not to be attempted .
dear , how beautiful these are !
" Can you come to Randalls at any time this morning ?-- Do , if it be possible .
Marianne rose the next morning with recovered spirits and happy looks .
" Not at all ," cried he ; " I am much obliged to you for it .
Here was a fortune at once ; besides which , there would be the chance of what might be done in any future war ; and he was sure Captain Wentworth was as likely a man to distinguish himself as any officer in the navy .
I am sorry Mr . and Mrs . Cole should have done it .
That she was really ill was very certain ; he had declared himself convinced of it , at Randalls .
I am glad he can afford it .
I would not bind myself to allow them any thing yearly .
If we were not related , it would not signify ; but as cousins , she would feel scrupulous as to any proposal of ours .
I know no man more likely than Mr . Knightley to do the sort of thing -- to do any thing really good - natured , useful , considerate , or benevolent .
But it was a matter of great consolation to her , that what brought evil to herself would bring good to her sister ; and Elinor , on the other hand , suspecting that it would not be in her power to avoid Edward entirely , comforted herself by thinking , that though their longer stay would therefore militate against her own happiness , it would be better for Marianne than an immediate return into Devonshire .
I doubt it .
I shall have many fellow - mourners for the ball , if not for Frank Churchill ; but Mr . Knightley will be happy .
Here are pretty girls enough , I am sure .
It was merely a blind to conceal his real situation with another .-- It was his object to blind all about him ; and no one , I am sure , could be more effectually blinded than myself -- except that I was _not_ blinded -- that it was my good fortune -- that , in short , I was somehow or other safe from him ."
He had never had an idea of throwing himself off ; he had feared that he was thrown off , but knew not why , and delicacy had kept him silent .
At present , believe me , I have no need of your services , being in cash again .
Mary , often a little unwell , and always thinking a great deal of her own complaints , and always in the habit of claiming Anne when anything was the matter , was indisposed ; and foreseeing that she should not have a day ' s health all the autumn , entreated , or rather required her , for it was hardly entreaty , to come to Uppercross Cottage , and bear her company as long as she should want her , instead of going to Bath .
For a little while Emma persevered in her silence ; but beginning to apprehend the bewitching flattery of that letter might be too powerful , she thought it best to say ,
She must tell you herself what she is -- yet not by word , for never was there a human creature who would so designedly suppress her own merit .-- Since I began this letter , which will be longer than I foresaw , I have heard from her .-- She gives a good account of her own health ; but as she never complains , I dare not depend .
" Why should they ask us ?"
" He was four years with my uncle , who lives at Longstaple , near Plymouth .
said Mrs . Dashwood .
But I never went beyond the Streights , and never was in the West Indies .
" My Emma !"
We measured the dining - room , and found it would hold exactly eighteen couple , and the affair was arranged precisely after my plan .
--
But what shall I say ?
" Well ," said Emma , willing to let it pass --" you want to hear about the wedding ; and I shall be happy to tell you , for we all behaved charmingly .
But while the imaginations of other people will carry them away to form wrong judgments of our conduct , and to decide on it by slight appearances , one ' s happiness must in some measure be always at the mercy of chance .
But that was not smart enough for my family .
My first care , when I DID arrive , was of course to seek for her ; but the search was as fruitless as it was melancholy .
Then , he said , he would endeavour to see her in the course of this day ."
I do not pretend to Emma ' s genius for foretelling and guessing .
Except the Sucklings and Bragges , there is not such another nursery establishment , so liberal and elegant , in all Mrs . Elton ' s acquaintance .
" There certainly are circumstances ," said Willoughby , " which might greatly endear it to me ; but this place will always have one claim of my affection , which no other can possibly share ."
" Oh !
Mrs . Martin had told her one day ( and there was a blush as she said it ,) that it was impossible for any body to be a better son , and therefore she was sure , whenever he married , he would make a good husband .
To the left is Barton park , amongst those woods and plantations .
One would fancy we were bosom friends !
Elinor told him that it was .
They sat down to tea -- the same party round the same table -- how often it had been collected !-- and how often had her eyes fallen on the same shrubs in the lawn , and observed the same beautiful effect of the western sun !-- But never in such a state of spirits , never in any thing like it ; and it was with difficulty that she could summon enough of her usual self to be the attentive lady of the house , or even the attentive daughter .
" I am sure you were of use to me ," cried Emma .
Isabella sent quite as good an account of her visitor as could be expected ; on her first arrival she had thought her out of spirits , which appeared perfectly natural , as there was a dentist to be consulted ; but , since that business had been over , she did not appear to find Harriet different from what she had known her before .-- Isabella , to be sure , was no very quick observer ; yet if Harriet had not been equal to playing with the children , it would not have escaped her .
That must be enough for us both ."
" Yes ," said he , " they were married last week , and are now at Dawlish ."
She played a great deal better than either of the Miss Musgroves , but having no voice , no knowledge of the harp , and no fond parents , to sit by and fancy themselves delighted , her performance was little thought of , only out of civility , or to refresh the others , as she was well aware .
Mr Shepherd , a civil , cautious lawyer , who , whatever might be his hold or his views on Sir Walter , would rather have the disagreeable prompted by anybody else , excused himself from offering the slightest hint , and only begged leave to recommend an implicit reference to the excellent judgement of Lady Russell , from whose known good sense he fully expected to have just such resolute measures advised as he meant to see finally adopted .
CHAPTER XVIII
Only conceive how comfortable they will be !
But a week must pass ; only a week , in Anne ' s reckoning , and then , she supposed , they must meet ; and soon she began to wish that she could feel secure even for a week .
In one point , I am sure , my dear cousin ," ( he continued , speaking lower , though there was no one else in the room ) " in one point , I am sure , we must feel alike .
To attach myself to your sister , therefore , was not a thing to be thought of ;-- and with a meanness , selfishness , cruelty -- which no indignant , no contemptuous look , even of yours , Miss Dashwood , can ever reprobate too much -- I was acting in this manner , trying to engage her regard , without a thought of returning it .-- But one thing may be said for me : even in that horrid state of selfish vanity , I did not know the extent of the injury I meditated , because I did not THEN know what it was to love .
Had I known it , I would have had the pleasure of talking to him about you ."
" You are very obliging .-- Frank will be extremely happy , I am sure .-- He is to be in town next week , if not sooner .
Two days passed away from the time of Mr . Palmer ' s departure , and her situation continued , with little variation , the same .
" You think so , do you ?-- I wanted the opinion of some one who could really judge .
" Our poor ball must be quite given up ."
He has been opening the doors very often this evening , and keeping them open very inconsiderately .
" Knightley !"
It would be a _secret_ satisfaction ; but the consciousness of a similarity of prospect would certainly add to the interest with which she should attend to any thing Jane might communicate .
When you had the presence of mind to suggest that Benwick would be the properest person to fetch a surgeon , you could have little idea of his being eventually one of those most concerned in her recovery ."
.
It was within four miles northward of Exeter .
As the door opened she was heard ,
It came from town , and is merely a letter of business ."
" Do you mean that she refused him ?"
" Very likely ," said Emma --" nothing more likely .
How was the truth to reach him ?
Dick had been left ill at Gibraltar , with a recommendation from his former captain to Captain Wentworth ."
I hope you have pleasant accounts from Windsor ?"
She was quite convinced of Mr . Elton ' s being in the fairest way of falling in love , if not in love already .
" I am concerned to hear of it .
When their promised visit to the Park and consequent introduction to these young ladies took place , they found in the appearance of the eldest , who was nearly thirty , with a very plain and not a sensible face , nothing to admire ; but in the other , who was not more than two or three and twenty , they acknowledged considerable beauty ; her features were pretty , and she had a sharp quick eye , and a smartness of air , which though it did not give actual elegance or grace , gave distinction to her person .-- Their manners were particularly civil , and Elinor soon allowed them credit for some kind of sense , when she saw with what constant and judicious attention they were making themselves agreeable to Lady Middleton .
He could not understand it ; but there were symptoms of intelligence between them -- he thought so at least -- symptoms of admiration on his side , which , having once observed , he could not persuade himself to think entirely void of meaning , however he might wish to escape any of Emma ' s errors of imagination .
I really wish you to call with me .
Elinor grew impatient for some tidings of Edward .
He sat musing a little while , and then said ,
Mrs . Jennings would have persuaded her , at its conclusion , to take some rest before her mother ' s arrival , and allow HER to take her place by Marianne ; but Elinor had no sense of fatigue , no capability of sleep at that moment about her , and she was not to be kept away from her sister an unnecessary instant .
It is a thing of course among us , that every man is refused , till he offers .
The Crofts took possession with true naval alertness , and were to be visited .
You got Hannah that good place .
" I am heartily glad of it ," he cried .
" Have you indeed , sir ?-- Bless me !
Elton ?"
Miss Nash has put down all the texts he has ever preached from since he came to Highbury .
What shall I say ?"
Elinor now began to make the tea , and Marianne was obliged to appear again .
Well , my dear Miss Elliot , I hope and trust you will be very happy .
What !
She had many acquaintance in the place , for her father was universally civil , but not one among them who could be accepted in lieu of Miss Taylor for even half a day .
" You mistake me , you quite mistake me ," she replied , exerting herself .
It would be an excellent match , for HE was rich , and SHE was handsome .
I am sorry I did not know it before ; for I certainly would not have suffered you to give me particulars of a conversation which you ought not to have known yourself .
Ladies can never look ill . And , seriously , Miss Fairfax is naturally so pale , as almost always to give the appearance of ill health .-- A most deplorable want of complexion ."
They had arrived late the night before .
He had found her agitated and low .-- Frank Churchill was a villain .-- He heard her declare that she had never loved him .
" How much your friends in Ireland must be enjoying your pleasure on this occasion , Miss Fairfax .
" I cannot suppose it possible that she should ."
" Do you dare say this ?"
You need not be afraid of unwholesome preserves here .
The evil day was put off .
My object -- my wish -- my sole wish in desiring it -- I hope , I believe it is -- is to be a means of giving comfort ;-- no , I must not say comfort -- not present comfort -- but conviction , lasting conviction to your sister ' s mind .
Her mother , still confident of their engagement , and relying as warmly as ever on his constancy , had only been roused by Elinor ' s application , to intreat from Marianne greater openness towards them both ; and this , with such tenderness towards her , such affection for Willoughby , and such a conviction of their future happiness in each other , that she wept with agony through the whole of it .
Mrs . Weston looked , and looked in vain .
You appear to me a little hoarse already , and when you consider what demand of voice and what fatigues to - morrow will bring , I think it would be no more than common prudence to stay at home and take care of yourself to - night ."
" I was very often influenced rightly by you -- oftener than I would own at the time .
Emma knew what was coming ; they must have the letter over again , and settle how long he had been gone , and how much he was engaged in company , and what a favourite he was wherever he went , and how full the Master of the Ceremonies ' ball had been ; and she went through it very well , with all the interest and all the commendation that could be requisite , and always putting forward to prevent Harriet ' s being obliged to say a word .
You think you carry it off very well , I dare say , but with you it is a sort of bravado , an air of affected unconcern ; I always observe it whenever I meet you under those circumstances .
If he does , however , they will leave me in peace , which may be a decent equivalent for the reversion .
But the fortune , which had been so tardy in coming , was his only one twelvemonth .
The word was _blunder_ ; and as Harriet exultingly proclaimed it , there was a blush on Jane ' s cheek which gave it a meaning not otherwise ostensible .
His gravity and thoughtfulness returned on him in their fullest extent -- and he sat for some time silent and dull .
" No -- to Combe Magna .
You would not like to leave him yourself , but you see I can be of no use .
" There is no use in staying here ; I must be off ."
After a moment ' s recollection , therefore , concluding that prudence required dispatch , and that her acquiescence would best promote it , she walked silently towards the table , and sat down .
Mrs . Weston was the object of a regard which had its basis in gratitude and esteem .
That is the key to a great deal of capacity .
An injunction of secresy had been among Mr . Weston ' s parting words .
" I can answer for every thing of that nature , sir , because it will be under Mrs . Weston ' s care .
" Not yet .
They talked of coming into this side of the country .
" No indeed I have not .
The Dashwoods were two days on the road , and Marianne bore her journey on both , without essential fatigue .
It was a gentleman ' s carriage , a curricle , but only coming round from the stable - yard to the front door ; somebody must be going away .
And so I shall always say , my dear , you may depend on it .
Her first attempts at usefulness were in an endeavour to find out who were the parents , but Harriet could not tell .
of what sort ?"
Mrs . Elton seemed most favourably impressed by the size of the room , the entrance , and all that she could see or imagine .
-- he cried , in the same eager tone .-- " Then she has forgiven me before she ought to have done it .
She promised him again and again to come -- much oftener than he doubted -- and was extremely gratified by such a proof of intimacy , such a distinguishing compliment as she chose to consider it .
), they happened to say , that her brother , Captain Wentworth , is just returned to England , or paid off , or something , and is coming to see them almost directly ; and most unluckily it came into mamma ' s head , when they were gone , that Wentworth , or something very like it , was the name of poor Richard ' s captain at one time ; I do not know when or where , but a great while before he died , poor fellow !
To the Middletons , to the Palmers , the Steeles , to every common acquaintance even , I had been insolent and unjust ; with a heart hardened against their merits , and a temper irritated by their very attention .-- To John , to Fanny ,-- yes , even to them , little as they deserve , I had given less than their due .
It is my party .
No doubt he is a sensible man , and I suppose may have a natural talent for -- thinks strongly and clearly -- and when he takes a pen in hand , his thoughts naturally find proper words .
" Miss Fairfax was not well enough to write ;" and when Mr . Perry called at Hartfield , the same morning , it appeared that she was so much indisposed as to have been visited , though against her own consent , by himself , and that she was suffering under severe headaches , and a nervous fever to a degree , which made him doubt the possibility of her going to Mrs . Smallridge ' s at the time proposed .
The listeners were amused ; and Mrs . Weston gave Emma a look of particular meaning .
You are his object -- and you will soon receive the completest proof of it .
The Randalls party agreed to it immediately ; and after a pretty long speech from Miss Bates , which few persons listened to , she also found it possible to accept dear Miss Woodhouse ' s most obliging invitation .
This was the page at which the favourite volume always opened :
E . is Knightley ' s right hand ."
She is only nursing Mrs Wallis of Marlborough Buildings ; a mere pretty , silly , expensive , fashionable woman , I believe ; and of course will have nothing to report but of lace and finery .
One always knows beforehand what the dinner will be , and who will be there ; and it is so very uncomfortable not having a carriage of one ' s own .
On Edward ' s side , more particularly , there was a deficiency of all that a lover ought to look and say on such an occasion .
There can be no doubt of your being a gentleman ' s daughter , and you must support your claim to that station by every thing within your own power , or there will be plenty of people who would take pleasure in degrading you ."
" It is indeed for Mrs . Jennings ; how provoking !"
If she suspected ANY prepossession elsewhere , it could not be in THAT quarter .
" No , I have not ; I know nothing ; pray tell me ."
CHAPTER III
" Norland is a prodigious beautiful place , is not it ?"
" But there may be pretty good guessing .
This was all overheard by Miss Dashwood ; and in the whole of the sentence , in his manner of pronouncing it , and in his addressing her sister by her Christian name alone , she instantly saw an intimacy so decided , a meaning so direct , as marked a perfect agreement between them .
She came in with a smile , smiled all the time of her visit , except when she laughed , and smiled when she went away .
very true indeed .
But Sir John ' s satisfaction in society was much more real ; he delighted in collecting about him more young people than his house would hold , and the noisier they were the better was he pleased .
Captain Wentworth was gone , for the present , to see his brother in Shropshire .
She had , while a very young girl , as soon as she had known him to be , in the event of her having no brother , the future baronet , meant to marry him , and her father had always meant that she should .
Captain Wentworth was folding up a letter in great haste , and either could not or would not answer fully .
You sink your voice , but I can distinguish the tones of that voice when they would be lost on others .
" He is always out of humour ."
And I should never have expected you to be lending your sanction to such vanity - baits for poor young ladies ."
CHAPTER V
Lucy became as necessary to Mrs . Ferrars , as either Robert or Fanny ; and while Edward was never cordially forgiven for having once intended to marry her , and Elinor , though superior to her in fortune and birth , was spoken of as an intruder , SHE was in every thing considered , and always openly acknowledged , to be a favourite child .
It ought to have been a habit with him by this time , of following his duty , instead of consulting expediency .
" Elinor , I must go home .
She was sitting near the window , and as soon as Sir John perceived her , he left the rest of the party to the ceremony of knocking at the door , and stepping across the turf , obliged her to open the casement to speak to him , though the space was so short between the door and the window , as to make it hardly possible to speak at one without being heard at the other .
" My feelings , you see , did not prevent my taking Mrs Harville and all her family to Plymouth ."
His chief reward for the painful exertion of disclosing past sorrows and present humiliations , was given in the pitying eye with which Marianne sometimes observed him , and the gentleness of her voice whenever ( though it did not often happen ) she was obliged , or could oblige herself to speak to him .
" No ," answered Elinor , with a smile , which concealed very agitated feelings , " on such a subject I certainly will not .
But , Anne , only conceive how extraordinary !
You and Mr . Elton are one as clever as the other .
Without shutting herself up from her family , or leaving the house in determined solitude to avoid them , or lying awake the whole night to indulge meditation , Elinor found every day afforded her leisure enough to think of Edward , and of Edward ' s behaviour , in every possible variety which the different state of her spirits at different times could produce ,-- with tenderness , pity , approbation , censure , and doubt .
" Is that Fanny ' s hair ?
She must be attached to you , or she would not have married you .
You and I shall not want opportunities .
Mrs . Dashwood remained at Norland several months ; not from any disinclination to move when the sight of every well known spot ceased to raise the violent emotion which it produced for a while ; for when her spirits began to revive , and her mind became capable of some other exertion than that of heightening its affliction by melancholy remembrances , she was impatient to be gone , and indefatigable in her inquiries for a suitable dwelling in the neighbourhood of Norland ; for to remove far from that beloved spot was impossible .
Mrs . Dashwood felt too much for speech , and instantly quitted the parlour to give way in solitude to the concern and alarm which this sudden departure occasioned .
Bought at Weymouth , you know -- Mr . Dixon ' s choice .
The first remote sound to which she felt herself obliged to attend , was the name of Jane Fairfax .
I am sure , Anne , if you would , you might persuade him that I really am very ill -- a great deal worse than I ever own ."
She would have given the world to be able to speak -- and to make them understand that she hoped no coolness , no slight , would appear in their behaviour to him ;-- but she had no utterance , and was obliged to leave all to their own discretion .
It was soon drawn , perforce another way .
We were last night at Lady Middleton ' s , where there was a dance .
Oh !
She had half a mind to resent ; but an instant ' s observation convinced her that it was really said only to relieve his own feelings , and not meant to provoke ; and therefore she let it pass .
Thy ready wit the word will soon supply , May its approval beam in that soft eye !
She promised to think of it , and advised him to think of it more ; but he was fully convinced , that no reflection could alter his wishes or his opinion on the subject .
Let him know me to be a friend of yours , and then he will think little of the trouble required , which it is very natural for him now , with so many affairs and engagements of his own , to avoid and get rid of as he can ; very natural , perhaps .
The aunt and niece seemed both escaping into the adjoining room .
Be satisfied with doctoring and coddling yourself and the children , and let me look as I chuse ."
He talked of Harriet , and praised her so warmly , that she could not suppose any thing wanting which a little time would not add .
I question whether Marianne NOW , will marry a man worth more than five or six hundred a - year , at the utmost , and I am very much deceived if YOU do not do better .
The tea things were brought in , and already had Marianne been disappointed more than once by a rap at a neighbouring door , when a loud one was suddenly heard which could not be mistaken for one at any other house , Elinor felt secure of its announcing Willoughby ' s approach , and Marianne , starting up , moved towards the door .
Mr . Knightley , I shall not allow you to be a fair judge in this case .
It was her superior duty .
I can hardly imagine the young man whom I saw talking with you the other day could express himself so well , if left quite to his own powers , and yet it is not the style of a woman ; no , certainly , it is too strong and concise ; not diffuse enough for a woman .
I must make myself very disagreeable , or she would not have said such a thing to an old friend ."
She was short and plump , had a very pretty face , and the finest expression of good humour in it that could possibly be .
He came back , had had his hair cut , and laughed at himself with a very good grace , but without seeming really at all ashamed of what he had done .
" I do not find myself making any use of the word _sacrifice_ ," said she .-- " In not one of all my clever replies , my delicate negatives , is there any allusion to making a sacrifice .
Chapter 20
He had been in Bath about a fortnight ; ( he had passed through Bath in November , in his way to London , when the intelligence of Sir Walter ' s being settled there had of course reached him , though only twenty - four hours in the place , but he had not been able to avail himself of it ;) but he had now been a fortnight in Bath , and his first object on arriving , had been to leave his card in Camden Place , following it up by such assiduous endeavours to meet , and when they did meet , by such great openness of conduct , such readiness to apologize for the past , such solicitude to be received as a relation again , that their former good understanding was completely re - established .
Oh !
Well , and so this was kept a great secret , for fear of Mrs . Ferrars , and neither she nor your brother or sister suspected a word of the matter ;-- till this very morning , poor Nancy , who , you know , is a well - meaning creature , but no conjurer , popt it all out .
This argument was irresistible .
It was only to ask Elinor to marry him ;-- and considering that he was not altogether inexperienced in such a question , it might be strange that he should feel so uncomfortable in the present case as he really did , so much in need of encouragement and fresh air .
Mr Elliot is evidently a disingenuous , artificial , worldly man , who has never had any better principle to guide him than selfishness ."
I saw you first in February ."
I go to Oxford tomorrow ."
My playing is no more like her ' s , than a lamp is like sunshine ."
Sincerely wish you happy in your choice , and it shall not be my fault if we are not always good friends , as our near relationship now makes proper .
Nay , most likely they are married already , for I do not know what they should wait for ."
Harriet had been conscious of a difference in his behaviour ever since those two decisive dances .-- Emma knew that he had , on that occasion , found her much superior to his expectation .
When he came to Miss Woodhouse , he was obliged to read the whole of it aloud -- all that related to her , with a smile ; a look ; a shake of the head ; a word or two of assent , or disapprobation ; or merely of love , as the subject required ; concluding , however , seriously , and , after steady reflection , thus --
She understood him .
He told her the news .
I want you to talk about me to Mr Elliot .
We must not be nice and ask for all the virtues into the bargain .
I do not mean to set you against him , but indeed he is not quite the thing !"
Elinor was obliged , though unwillingly , to believe that the sentiments which Mrs . Jennings had assigned him for her own satisfaction , were now actually excited by her sister ; and that however a general resemblance of disposition between the parties might forward the affection of Mr . Willoughby , an equally striking opposition of character was no hindrance to the regard of Colonel Brandon .
As she said this , she looked earnestly at Lucy , hoping to discover something in her countenance ; perhaps the falsehood of the greatest part of what she had been saying ; but Lucy ' s countenance suffered no change .
There was nothing in all this either to astonish or interest , and it caught Emma ' s attention only as it united with the subject which already engaged her mind .
Such a very kind attention -- and so thoughtful an attention !-- the sort of thing that so few men would think of .
At last , and tolerably in his usual tone , he said ,
He wished to avoid seeing her .
You are so much used to live alone , that you do not know the value of a companion ; and , perhaps no man can be a good judge of the comfort a woman feels in the society of one of her own sex , after being used to it all her life .
You do us a great deal of honour to - day , I am sure .
My acquaintance with him has been but trifling .-- And even if I have not underrated him hitherto , he may yet turn out well .-- With such a woman he has a chance .-- I have no motive for wishing him ill -- and for her sake , whose happiness will be involved in his good character and conduct , I shall certainly wish him well ."
ay ,-- Mr Wentworth , the curate of Monkford .
He had returned to a late dinner , after some days ' absence , and now walked up to Hartfield to say that all were well in Brunswick Square .
He looked pleased by this remembrance , and added ,
She meant to be very happy , in spite of the scene being laid at Mr . Cole ' s ; and without being able to forget that among the failings of Mr . Elton , even in the days of his favour , none had disturbed her more than his propensity to dine with Mr . Cole .
What formidable obstacle is she now to bring forward ?
" Do not be offended , Elinor , if my praise of him is not in every thing equal to your sense of his merits .
But this was one of the points on which the lady shewed her strength ; and when he recommended the advantage of resting herself a quarter of an hour at Winthrop , as she felt so tired , she resolutely answered , " Oh !
Or at least , if she did not bring herself quite to rejoice in Edward ' s being fettered to Lucy , she determined , that had Lucy been more amiable , she OUGHT to have rejoiced .
" No trouble in the world , ma ' am ," said the obliging Mrs . Ford .
How do you do , Mr .
For Mrs . Weston there was nothing to be done ; for Harriet every thing .
She had a large acquaintance , of course professionally , among those who can afford to buy , and she disposes of my merchandise .
And I hate Italian singing .-- There is no understanding a word of it .
I know Marianne ' s heart : I know that she dearly loves me , and that I shall not be the last to whom the affair is made known , when circumstances make the revealment of it eligible .
When they came to converse , she was soon sensible of some mental change .
Of course they must attend .
If you need farther explanation , I have the honour , my dear madam , of being your husband ' s son , and the advantage of inheriting a disposition to hope for good , which no inheritance of houses or lands can ever equal the value of .-- See me , then , under these circumstances , arriving on my first visit to Randalls ;-- and here I am conscious of wrong , for that visit might have been sooner paid .
She was most forcibly struck .
Emma had not another word to oppose .
" It is he ; it is indeed ;-- I know it is !"
She was delighted to see her father look comfortable , and very much pleased with herself for contriving things so well ; but the quiet prosings of three such women made her feel that every evening so spent was indeed one of the long evenings she had fearfully anticipated .
Her disposition and abilities were equally worthy of all that friendship could do ; and at eighteen or nineteen she was , as far as such an early age can be qualified for the care of children , fully competent to the office of instruction herself ; but she was too much beloved to be parted with .
These are the motives which I have been pressing on you .
Harriet , who was standing at some distance , and with face turned from her , did not immediately say any thing ; and when she did speak , it was in a voice nearly as agitated as Emma ' s .
Whenever James goes over to see his daughter , you know , she will be hearing of us .
no , no ;-- every feeling revolts .
Her early attachment to herself was very amiable ; and her inclination for good company , and power of appreciating what was elegant and clever , shewed that there was no want of taste , though strength of understanding must not be expected .
said she .-- " The regularity and despatch of it !
My dear sir , you really are too bountiful .
His was an involuntary confidence , an irrepressible effusion to a soothing friend -- not an application to a parent .
The whole family perceived it , and Mrs . Dashwood , attributing it to some want of liberality in his mother , sat down to table indignant against all selfish parents .
I do not know any body who draws so well as you do .
Emma only nodded , and smiled .-- After a little thinking , and a very tender sigh , he added ,
" What can bring her here so often ?"
Miss Smith , and Miss Bickerton , another parlour boarder at Mrs . Goddard ' s , who had been also at the ball , had walked out together , and taken a road , the Richmond road , which , though apparently public enough for safety , had led them into alarm .-- About half a mile beyond Highbury , making a sudden turn , and deeply shaded by elms on each side , it became for a considerable stretch very retired ; and when the young ladies had advanced some way into it , they had suddenly perceived at a small distance before them , on a broader patch of greensward by the side , a party of gipsies .
" Sit down , and I will be both ."
I seem to have been distressing you for nothing .
An unpretending , single - minded , artless girl -- infinitely to be preferred by any man of sense and taste to such a woman as Mrs . Elton .
No misfortune occurred , again to prevent the ball .
Elinor said no more ; it immediately struck her that she must then be writing to Willoughby ; and the conclusion which as instantly followed was , that , however mysteriously they might wish to conduct the affair , they must be engaged .
" But , my dear papa , it is supposed to be summer ; a warm day in summer .
Most grateful did Elinor feel to Lady Middleton for observing , at this moment , " that it rained very hard ," though she believed the interruption to proceed less from any attention to her , than from her ladyship ' s great dislike of all such inelegant subjects of raillery as delighted her husband and mother .
What !
She now found , that in spite of herself , she had always admitted a hope , while Edward remained single , that something would occur to prevent his marrying Lucy ; that some resolution of his own , some mediation of friends , or some more eligible opportunity of establishment for the lady , would arise to assist the happiness of all .
It was altogether very extraordinary ; flattering , but painful .
I do not think they were ."
Better wait an hour or two , or even half a day for your letters , than run the risk of bringing on your cough again .
And to propose that she and I should unite to form a musical club !
" I am very glad to know all this ," said Anne , after a little thoughtfulness .
She wondered , indeed , at his thinking it necessary to do so ; but supposed it to be the proper etiquette .
Imagine to yourself , my dear Elinor , the delight of a gallop on some of these downs ."
I have neglected her too long .
" Will you be so kind ," said she , " when I am missed , as to say that I am gone home ?-- I am going this moment .-- My aunt is not aware how late it is , nor how long we have been absent -- but I am sure we shall be wanted , and I am determined to go directly .-- I have said nothing about it to any body .
speaking to her in a lowered voice .
Twice was his card found on the table , when they returned from their morning ' s engagements .
Marianne sighed , and repeated , " I wish for no change ."
She left to my care her only child , a little girl , the offspring of her first guilty connection , who was then about three years old .
after the note I sent him this morning , and the message he returned , that he should certainly be at home till one ."
" In that respect how unlike dear Mrs . Elton , who wants to be wiser and wittier than all the world !
They were actually on the same sofa , for Mrs Musgrove had most readily made room for him ; they were divided only by Mrs Musgrove .
Then , and then only , under such a roof , I might perhaps be as happy at Combe as I have been at Barton ."
Anne herself was become hardened to such affronts ; but she felt the imprudence of the arrangement quite as keenly as Lady Russell .
Knightley .-- Were this most unequal of all connexions to take place , on her must rest all the reproach of having given it a beginning ; for his attachment , she must believe to be produced only by a consciousness of Harriet ' s ;-- and even were this not the case , he would never have known Harriet at all but for her folly .
" Take it ," said Emma , smiling , and pushing the paper towards Harriet --" it is for you .
Do you think I am right ?"
" There is no hurry on my side .
Had it taken place only once a year , it would have been a grievance .
" Quite delightful !"
I have not time to speak to Mrs . Jennings about it myself , but pray tell her I am quite happy to hear she is not in anger against us , and Lady Middleton the same ; and if anything should happen to take you and your sister away , and Mrs . Jennings should want company , I am sure we should be very glad to come and stay with her for as long a time as she likes .
it is no difficulty to see who you take after !
" I leave an excellent substitute in my daughter .
I am always well , you know .
Marianne might at that moment be dying .
His want of spirits , of openness , and of consistency , were most usually attributed to his want of independence , and his better knowledge of Mrs . Ferrars ' s disposition and designs .
Donwell was famous for its strawberry - beds , which seemed a plea for the invitation : but no plea was necessary ; cabbage - beds would have been enough to tempt the lady , who only wanted to be going somewhere .
It was from Lady Middleton , announcing their arrival in Conduit Street the night before , and requesting the company of her mother and cousins the following evening .
Mrs . Bates was engaged to spend the evening at Hartfield , James had due notice , and he sanguinely hoped that neither dear little Henry nor dear little John would have any thing the matter with them , while dear Emma were gone .
The Colonel , too !-- perhaps scarcely less an object of pity !-- Oh !-- how slow was the progress of time which yet kept them in ignorance !
Marianne said not a word .-- She trembled , her eyes were fixed on the ground , and her lips became whiter than even sickness had left them .
-- As she said this , she sunk into a reverie for a few moments ;-- but rousing herself again , " Now , Edward ," said she , calling his attention to the prospect , " here is Barton valley .
Elinor , affected by his relation , and still more by his distress , could not speak .
Only think , Mamma , how it is improved since I was here last !
" Increase !"
" Well !"
dear -- I think you play the best of the two .
I have a great regard for Mr . Perry .
" You appear to feel a great deal -- but I am not aware how you or any of Miss Fairfax ' s acquaintance here , any of those who have known her longer than yourself , can shew her any other attention than "--
She might have been unconsciously sucking in the sad poison , while a sharer of his conversation with her friend ; and from the best , the purest of motives , might now be denying herself this visit to Ireland , and resolving to divide herself effectually from him and his connexions by soon beginning her career of laborious duty .
She could not even thank him .
The picture !-- How eager he had been about the picture !-- and the charade !-- and an hundred other circumstances ;-- how clearly they had seemed to point at Harriet .
Her distress returned , however , on perceiving smiles and intelligent glances pass between two or three of the lady visitors , as if they believed themselves quite in the secret .
As to the sad catastrophe itself , it could be canvassed only in one style by a couple of steady , sensible women , whose judgements had to work on ascertained events ; and it was perfectly decided that it had been the consequence of much thoughtlessness and much imprudence ; that its effects were most alarming , and that it was frightful to think , how long Miss Musgrove ' s recovery might yet be doubtful , and how liable she would still remain to suffer from the concussion hereafter !
She was sent back , however , in a moment by the entrance of Captain Wentworth himself , among a party of gentlemen and ladies , evidently his acquaintance , and whom he must have joined a little below Milsom Street .
" I am very much obliged to you ," said Emma , laughing again .
" Should I send it to Mrs . Goddard ' s , ma ' am ?"
" It is not very likely , my dear , that bathing should have been of use to her -- and if I had known you were wanting an embrocation , I would have spoken to --
Poverty certainly has not contracted her mind : I really believe , if she had only a shilling in the world , she would be very likely to give away sixpence of it ; and nobody is afraid of her : that is a great charm ."
It was possible that he might stop in his way home to ask them how they did .
Fifty thousand pounds !
Elinor even advised her against it .
To guess what all this meant , was impossible even for Emma .
With regard to her not accompanying them to Ireland , her account to her aunt contained nothing but truth , though there might be some truths not told .
Edward had been staying several weeks in the house before he engaged much of Mrs . Dashwood ' s attention ; for she was , at that time , in such affliction as rendered her careless of surrounding objects .
So far was she , at the same time , from any backwardness to give Elinor that credit which Edward WOULD give her , that she spoke of her friendship for them both with the most grateful warmth , was ready to own all their obligation to her , and openly declared that no exertion for their good on Miss Dashwood ' s part , either present or future , would ever surprise her , for she believed her capable of doing any thing in the world for those she really valued .
If any thing could be more , where all was most , she was more reserved on the subject of Weymouth and the Dixons than any thing .
Mrs . Ferrars came to inspect the happiness which she was almost ashamed of having authorised ; and even the Dashwoods were at the expense of a journey from Sussex to do them honour .
The others returned , the room filled again , benches were reclaimed and repossessed , and another hour of pleasure or of penance was to be sat out , another hour of music was to give delight or the gapes , as real or affected taste for it prevailed .
" Any acquaintance of Anne ' s will always be welcome to me ," was Lady Russell ' s kind answer .
I have seen Mr . Ferrars two or three times in Harley Street , and am much pleased with him .
Mrs . Jennings came immediately to their room on her return , and without waiting to have her request of admittance answered , opened the door and walked in with a look of real concern .
Though Charles and Mary had remained at Lyme much longer after Mr and Mrs Musgrove ' s going than Anne conceived they could have been at all wanted , they were yet the first of the family to be at home again ; and as soon as possible after their return to Uppercross they drove over to the Lodge .
She came hallooing to the window , " How do you do , my dear ?
If you do not call early it will be a slight ."
Very , very happy were both Elizabeth and Anne Elliot as they walked in .
He enquired after you very particularly ; asked even if you were personally altered , little suspecting that to my eye you could never alter ."
said Marianne , on her leaving them .
All within Elinor ' s breast was satisfaction , silent and strong .
She felt that his influence over her mind was heightened by circumstances which ought not in reason to have weight ; by that person of uncommon attraction , that open , affectionate , and lively manner which it was no merit to possess ; and by that still ardent love for Marianne , which it was not even innocent to indulge .
And in short , he had looked and said everything with such exquisite grace , that they could assure them all , their heads were both turned by him ; and off they ran , quite as full of glee as of love , and apparently more full of Captain Wentworth than of little Charles .
Perhaps it is about Miss Williams and , by the bye , I dare say it is , because he looked so conscious when I mentioned her .
" I think they will neither of them do the other any good ."
I considered the past : I saw in my own behaviour , since the beginning of our acquaintance with him last autumn , nothing but a series of imprudence towards myself , and want of kindness to others .
I could rather believe every creature of my acquaintance leagued together to ruin me in his opinion , than believe his nature capable of such cruelty .
I will answer for the gentleman ' s indifference ."
I have known a good deal of the profession ; and besides their liberality , they are so neat and careful in all their ways !
They had no inclination to listen to her .
Anne did not receive the perfect conviction which the Admiral meant to convey , but it would have been useless to press the enquiry farther .
" You are very kind -- but you are mistaken -- and I must set you right .-- I am not in want of that sort of compassion .
" TWO thousand a year !
Jane had come to Highbury professedly for three months ; the Campbells were gone to Ireland for three months ; but now the Campbells had promised their daughter to stay at least till Midsummer , and fresh invitations had arrived for her to join them there .
" Oh !
" My dear Anne ,-- I make no apology for my silence , because I know how little people think of letters in such a place as Bath .
It would not have been the awkwardness of a moment , it would have been rather a pleasure , previous to the suspicions of this very day ; she could have talked to him of Harriet , and the three - quarters of a mile would have seemed but one .
They were on Union Street , when a quicker step behind , a something of familiar sound , gave her two moments ' preparation for the sight of Captain Wentworth .
" I can never think of it ," she cried , " without extreme shame ."
There is so little real friendship in the world !
Eliza had confessed to me , though most reluctantly , the name of her lover ; and when he returned to town , which was within a fortnight after myself , we met by appointment , he to defend , I to punish his conduct .
The house and the garden , with all the objects surrounding them , were now become familiar , and the ordinary pursuits which had given to Norland half its charms were engaged in again with far greater enjoyment than Norland had been able to afford , since the loss of their father .
Weston may grow cross from the wantonness of comfort , or his son may plague him ."
It was evident how little the women were used to the sight of anything tolerable , by the effect which a man of decent appearance produced .
If , indeed , it could be restored to our poor little boy --"
Tell him I must see him again -- must speak to him instantly .-- I cannot rest -- I shall not have a moment ' s peace till this is explained -- some dreadful misapprehension or other .-- Oh go to him this moment ."
nothing seems to do her any good .
Quick and decided in her ways , Emma lost no time in inviting , encouraging , and telling her to come very often ; and as their acquaintance increased , so did their satisfaction in each other .
There is an anxiety , a curiosity in what one feels for Emma .
It was now proved that he belonged to the same inn as themselves ; and this second meeting , short as it was , also proved again by the gentleman ' s looks , that he thought hers very lovely , and by the readiness and propriety of his apologies , that he was a man of exceedingly good manners .
Her face was crimsoned over , and she exclaimed , in a voice of the greatest emotion , " Good God !
You will be adored in Highbury .
What do you imagine his age to be ?"
But I must be more in want of a friend , or an agreeable companion , than I have yet been , to take the trouble of conquering any body ' s reserve to procure one .
At first , she thought it was a good deal ; and afterwards , but little .
There she is -- no , that ' s somebody else .
_Now_ you have nothing to try for .
Emma liked the subject so well , that she began upon it , to Mrs . Weston , very soon after their moving into the drawing - room : wishing her joy -- yet observing , that she knew the first meeting must be rather alarming .-- Mrs . Weston agreed to it ; but added , that she should be very glad to be secure of undergoing the anxiety of a first meeting at the time talked of : " for I cannot depend upon his coming .
Sir Walter , without hesitation , declared the Admiral to be the best - looking sailor he had ever met with , and went so far as to say , that if his own man might have had the arranging of his hair , he should not be ashamed of being seen with him any where ; and the Admiral , with sympathetic cordiality , observed to his wife as they drove back through the park , " I thought we should soon come to a deal , my dear , in spite of what they told us at Taunton .
But even then there was something odd in their way of going on .
" I would ask for the pleasure of your company , Mr . Knightley , but I am a very slow walker , and my pace would be tedious to you ; and , besides , you have another long walk before you , to Donwell Abbey ."
as we pass , however .
But Marianne , who saw his agitation , and could easily trace it to whatever cause best pleased herself , was perfectly satisfied , and soon talked of something else .
To be sure by next week I may be allowed to think it all settled , and build my own selfish schemes on Mr Elliot ' s good fortune ."
I have found him capable of giving me much information on various subjects ; and he has always answered my inquiries with readiness of good - breeding and good nature ."
Mrs . Jennings was not struck by the same thought ; for soon after his entrance , she walked across the room to the tea - table where Elinor presided , and whispered -- " The Colonel looks as grave as ever you see .
Nothing in my opinion has ever passed to justify doubt ; no secrecy has been attempted ; all has been uniformly open and unreserved .
" Oh !
At any rate it would be most ungenerous .
I planned the match from that hour ; and when such success has blessed me in this instance , dear papa , you cannot think that I shall leave off match - making ."
But now I have no doubt of seeing him here about the second week in January ."
" I do not know ," said he , after a pause of expectation on her side , and thoughtfulness on his own ,--" how YOU may have accounted for my behaviour to your sister , or what diabolical motive you may have imputed to me .-- Perhaps you will hardly think the better of me ,-- it is worth the trial however , and you shall hear every thing .
They will come and stand by my chair , and say , ` Grandpapa , can you give me a bit of string ?'
Her joy was of a different kind , and led to any thing rather than to gaiety .
Marianne ' s eagerness to be gone declared her dependence on finding him there ; and Elinor was resolved not only upon gaining every new light as to his character which her own observation or the intelligence of others could give her , but likewise upon watching his behaviour to her sister with such zealous attention , as to ascertain what he was and what he meant , before many meetings had taken place .
You may be very sure I shall always take care of _them_ ."
.
" Aye , I wonder which she will .
I know why you inquire about him , very well ; your sister is to marry him .
He knew her illnesses ; they never occurred but for her own convenience .
I shall be truly glad to have them back again .
" You spent the evening with Mrs .
His gallantry was always on the alert .
Such a companion for herself in the periods of anxiety and cheerlessness before her !-- Such a partner in all those duties and cares to which time must be giving increase of melancholy !
You will be too late if you do not make haste .
Mr and Mrs Musgrove , either from seeing little , or from an entire confidence in the discretion of both their daughters , and of all the young men who came near them , seemed to leave everything to take its chance .
She was received with a cordial respect which could not but please , and given all the consequence she could wish for .
And so the letter that came today finished it !
He had turned away , and the horses were in motion .
Ah !
They want her ( Mr . and Mrs . Dixon ) excessively to come over with Colonel and Mrs . Campbell ; quite depend upon it ; nothing can be more kind or pressing than their _joint_ invitation , Jane says , as you will hear presently ; Mr . Dixon does not seem in the least backward in any attention .
No such importation of novelties could enrich their intellectual stores at present .
dear !
It would be a compact of convenience , and the world would be satisfied .
Its effect upon her appears in the immediate resolution it produced : as soon as she found I was really gone from Randalls , she closed with the offer of that officious Mrs . Elton ; the whole system of whose treatment of her , by the bye , has ever filled me with indignation and hatred .
She avoided the looks of them all , could neither eat nor speak , and after some time , on her mother ' s silently pressing her hand with tender compassion , her small degree of fortitude was quite overcome , she burst into tears and left the room .
Had he begun as he ought , there would have been no difficulty now ."
The Harvilles had promised to come with her and stay at Uppercross , whenever she returned .
You knew I should not stir till my lord and master appeared .-- Here have I been sitting this hour , giving these young ladies a sample of true conjugal obedience -- for who can say , you know , how soon it may be wanted ?"
The very want of such equality might prevent his perception of it ; but he must know that in fortune and consequence she was greatly his superior .
said she ; ` well , that is quite unexpected .
This would be a trial .
Frank Churchill sang again .
Anne hoped the gentlemen might each be too much self - occupied to hear .
She saw in a moment all the possible good .
Her character depends upon those she is with ; but in good hands she will turn out a valuable woman ."
There is no use in delay .
Mr . Knightley and Harriet had arrived during her absence , and were sitting with her father .-- Mr .
The reason alleged was their determined resolution of not leaving their mother at that time of the year .
" The last hours were certainly very painful ," replied Anne ; " but when pain is over , the remembrance of it often becomes a pleasure .
He must do it all himself .
Anne had the whole history of all that such an evening could supply from Lady Russell .
The want of Miss Taylor would be felt every hour of every day .
Her father ' s feelings were quite distinct .
" You are not quite so miserable , though , as when you first came .
my dear sir , her throat is so much better that I have hardly any uneasiness about it .
I had not thought of Mrs . Dixon .
" I do not say it is so ; but you will do well to consider whether it is so or not , and to regulate your behaviour accordingly .
They were gradually acquainted , and when acquainted , rapidly and deeply in love .
At present , there was nothing to be done for Harriet ; good wishes for the future were all that could yet be possible on Emma ' s side .
He _had_ despaired at one period ; he had received such an injunction to caution and silence , as for the time crushed every hope ;-- she had begun by refusing to hear him .-- The change had perhaps been somewhat sudden ;-- her proposal of taking another turn , her renewing the conversation which she had just put an end to , might be a little extraordinary !-- She felt its inconsistency ; but Mr . Knightley was so obliging as to put up with it , and seek no farther explanation .
However , I do not mean to set up my opinion against your ' s -- and I am sure I shall not wish for the acquaintance of his wife .
" I will not trust to THAT ," retreating to her own room .
Emma began to listen better .
It must be very clever , or he would not have brought it .
He saw you then at Lyme , and liked you so well as to be exceedingly pleased to meet with you again in Camden Place , as Miss Anne Elliot , and from that moment , I have no doubt , had a double motive in his visits there .
But you really do admit the justice of what I have said in his defence ?-- I am happy -- and he is acquitted ."
He had not been at Donwell for two years .
I answered it within an hour ; but from the confusion of my mind , and the multiplicity of business falling on me at once , my answer , instead of being sent with all the many other letters of that day , was locked up in my writing - desk ; and I , trusting that I had written enough , though but a few lines , to satisfy her , remained without any uneasiness .-- I was rather disappointed that I did not hear from her again speedily ; but I made excuses for her , and was too busy , and -- may I add ?-- too cheerful in my views to be captious .-- We removed to Windsor ; and two days afterwards I received a parcel from her , my own letters all returned !-- and a few lines at the same time by the post , stating her extreme surprize at not having had the smallest reply to her last ; and adding , that as silence on such a point could not be misconstrued , and as it must be equally desirable to both to have every subordinate arrangement concluded as soon as possible , she now sent me , by a safe conveyance , all my letters , and requested , that if I could not directly command hers , so as to send them to Highbury within a week , I would forward them after that period to her at --: in short , the full direction to Mr . Smallridge ' s , near Bristol , stared me in the face .
She saw in it but an aggravation of the evil .
He will rally again , and be happy with another ."
High in the rank of her most serious and heartfelt felicities , was the reflection that all necessity of concealment from Mr . Knightley would soon be over .
If one thinks of all that it has to do , and all that it does so well , it is really astonishing !"
The conclusion of her visit , however , was diversified in a way which she had not at all imagined .
Marianne had now been brought by degrees , so much into the habit of going out every day , that it was become a matter of indifference to her , whether she went or not : and she prepared quietly and mechanically for every evening ' s engagement , though without expecting the smallest amusement from any , and very often without knowing , till the last moment , where it was to take her .
Such was Jane Fairfax ' s history .
it gives one exactly the idea of such a height as Miss Smith ' s .
This decided the matter at once .
" I told you yesterday ," cried Mr . Weston with exultation , " I told you all that he would be here before the time named .
Always to be presented with the date of her own birth and see no marriage follow but that of a youngest sister , made the book an evil ; and more than once , when her father had left it open on the table near her , had she closed it , with averted eyes , and pushed it away .
It reminded her of their first forlorn tete - a - tete , on the evening of Mrs . Weston ' s wedding - day ; but Mr . Knightley had walked in then , soon after tea , and dissipated every melancholy fancy .
What will it answer ?
I shall soon have done .
A thousand a - year is a great deal for a mother to give away , to make over for ever ; but Mrs . Ferrars has a noble spirit .
CHAPTER XI
The business of self - command she settled very easily ;-- with strong affections it was impossible , with calm ones it could have no merit .
They thanked her ; but were obliged to resist all her entreaties .
William Larkins is such an old acquaintance !
or a mermaid ?
They did not know .
I came to inquire , but I was convinced before I could ask the question .
Emma returned all her attention to her father , saying in secret --
" I do not know , my dear .
I was very well yesterday ; nothing at all the matter with me till this morning .
" That may be done without horses .
" Good heavens !"
CHAPTER 34
I doubted it more the next day on Box Hill ; when , provoked by such conduct on my side , such shameful , insolent neglect of her , and such apparent devotion to Miss W ., as it would have been impossible for any woman of sense to endure , she spoke her resentment in a form of words perfectly intelligible to me .-- In short , my dear madam , it was a quarrel blameless on her side , abominable on mine ; and I returned the same evening to Richmond , though I might have staid with you till the next morning , merely because I would be as angry with her as possible .
The happiness of this most happy day , received its completion , in the animated contemplation of his worth which this comparison produced .
He had gone three miles round one day in order to bring her some walnuts , because she had said how fond she was of them , and in every thing else he was so very obliging .
He met with a clever young German artist at the Cape , and in compliance with a promise to my poor sister , sat to him , and was bringing it home for her ; and I have now the charge of getting it properly set for another !
Every thing as natural and simple as possible .
There will be the leg to be salted , you know , which is so very nice , and the loin to be dressed directly in any manner they like ."
Is it kingdom ?
It was a great object to her to escape all enquiry or eclat ; but it was her intention to be as decidedly cool to him as might be compatible with their relationship ; and to retrace , as quietly as she could , the few steps of unnecessary intimacy she had been gradually led along .
CHAPTER III
The world had made him extravagant and vain -- Extravagance and vanity had made him cold - hearted and selfish .
" Oh !
" Ought to refuse him !
It was a very fine November day , and the Miss Musgroves came through the little grounds , and stopped for no other purpose than to say , that they were going to take a long walk , and therefore concluded Mary could not like to go with them ; and when Mary immediately replied , with some jealousy at not being supposed a good walker , " Oh , yes , I should like to join you very much , I am very fond of a long walk ;" Anne felt persuaded , by the looks of the two girls , that it was precisely what they did not wish , and admired again the sort of necessity which the family habits seemed to produce , of everything being to be communicated , and everything being to be done together , however undesired and inconvenient .
An excellent charade indeed !
An intimate acquaintance of Mrs . Jennings joined them soon after they entered the Gardens , and Elinor was not sorry that by her continuing with them , and engaging all Mrs . Jennings ' s conversation , she was herself left to quiet reflection .
you are too obliging !
The two eldest little Knightleys were engaged to pay their grandpapa and aunt a visit of some weeks in the spring , and their papa now proposed bringing them , and staying one whole day at Hartfield -- which one day would be the very day of this party .-- His professional engagements did not allow of his being put off , but both father and daughter were disturbed by its happening so .
Mr . Elton seemed very properly struck and delighted by the idea , and was repeating , " No husbands and wives in the case at present indeed , as you observe .
The charm of an object to occupy the many vacancies of Harriet ' s mind was not to be talked away .
She had taken up a wrong idea , fancying it was a mother and daughter , a son and son ' s wife , who all lived together ; but when it appeared that the Mr . Martin , who bore a part in the narrative , and was always mentioned with approbation for his great good - nature in doing something or other , was a single man ; that there was no young Mrs . Martin , no wife in the case ; she did suspect danger to her poor little friend from all this hospitality and kindness , and that , if she were not taken care of , she might be required to sink herself forever .
I felt sure that you was angry with me ; and have been quarrelling with myself ever since , for having took such a liberty as to trouble you with my affairs .
Weston .]
The scheme had received its first impulse by Captain Harville ' s wanting to come to Bath on business .
He had just settled this point with great composure , when the entrance of Mrs . John Dashwood put an end to the subject .
My love for Mr . and Mrs . Weston gives me a decided prejudice in his favour ."
But mama did not think the match good enough for me , otherwise Sir John would have mentioned it to the Colonel , and we should have been married immediately ."
" And so then , I suppose ," said Mrs Musgrove , in a low voice , as if thinking aloud , " so then he went away to the Laconia , and there he met with our poor boy .
repeated Anne , looking up surprised .
I have something to communicate that will astonish you not a little .
She was the instigator .
I never thought Edward so stubborn , so unfeeling before .
The baronet , nevertheless , is not unlikely to marry again ; he is quite fool enough .
replied he .
Certainly his being at Randalls had given great spirit to the last two weeks -- indescribable spirit ; the idea , the expectation of seeing him which every morning had brought , the assurance of his attentions , his liveliness , his manners !
Mr . Weston , you must really have had Aladdin ' s lamp .
" I have no doubt of its being our carriage with Miss Bates and Jane .
I remember one evening the poor boys saying , ` Uncle seems always tired now .'"
Poor Harville , sister !
Vanity was the beginning and the end of Sir Walter Elliot ' s character ; vanity of person and of situation .
She in the overflowing spirits of her recovery , repeats it all to her nurse ; and the nurse knowing my acquaintance with you , very naturally brings it all to me .
" I have burnt all your letters , and will return your picture the first opportunity .
Even now her self - command is invariable .
" So unreasonably early !"
Come , Jane , take my other arm ."
Waiving that point , however , and supposing her to be , as you describe her , only pretty and good - natured , let me tell you , that in the degree she possesses them , they are not trivial recommendations to the world in general , for she is , in fact , a beautiful girl , and must be thought so by ninety - nine people out of an hundred ; and till it appears that men are much more philosophic on the subject of beauty than they are generally supposed ; till they do fall in love with well - informed minds instead of handsome faces , a girl , with such loveliness as Harriet , has a certainty of being admired and sought after , of having the power of chusing from among many , consequently a claim to be nice .
And when he does , Mary , you may depend upon hearing my opinion ; but I am determined not to judge him beforehand ."
He had told her that he could not allow himself the pleasure of stopping at Hartfield , as he was to be at home by the middle of the day .
You are so kind !"
I have great hope of prevailing .
She must not make it a more decided subject of misery to him , by a melancholy tone herself .
She distrusted the past , if not the present .
The consequence was , that Elinor set out by herself to pay a visit , for which no one could really have less inclination , and to run the risk of a tete - a - tete with a woman , whom neither of the others had so much reason to dislike .
Sir John had been very urgent with them all to spend the next day at the park .
You see how it has carried away her freckles ."
But while so many were devoting him to Emma , and Emma herself making him over to Harriet , Mr . Knightley began to suspect him of some inclination to trifle with Jane Fairfax .
You think so , do not you ?"
Elinor for a few moments remained silent .
Mrs Croft was taking leave .
Then might she again take up the book of books with as much enjoyment as in her early youth , but now she liked it not .
At this moment Frank began talking so vigorously , that Emma could not but imagine he had overheard his own praises , and did not want to hear more ;-- and the voices of the ladies were drowned for a while , till another suspension brought Mrs . Elton ' s tones again distinctly forward .-- Mr .
When Sir John returned , he joined most heartily in the general regret on so unfortunate an event ; concluding however by observing , that as they were all got together , they must do something by way of being happy ; and after some consultation it was agreed , that although happiness could only be enjoyed at Whitwell , they might procure a tolerable composure of mind by driving about the country .
I had therefore nothing in the world to do , but to fancy myself in love ; and as my mother did not make my home in every respect comfortable , as I had no friend , no companion in my brother , and disliked new acquaintance , it was not unnatural for me to be very often at Longstaple , where I always felt myself at home , and was always sure of a welcome ; and accordingly I spent the greatest part of my time there from eighteen to nineteen : Lucy appeared everything that was amiable and obliging .
She was feeling too much ; but at last Emma collected from her enough to understand the sort of meeting , and the sort of pain it was creating .
Jane ' s solicitude about fetching her own letters had not escaped Emma .
John loves Emma with a reasonable and therefore not a blind affection , and Isabella always thinks as he does ; except when he is not quite frightened enough about the children .
I am very much mistaken if your sex in general would not think such beauty , and such temper , the highest claims a woman could possess ."
Have we not perfectly understood each other ?
It was growing late , and Miss Bates became anxious to get home , on her mother ' s account .
But one morning -- I forget exactly the day -- but perhaps it was the Tuesday or Wednesday before _that_ _evening_ , he wanted to make a memorandum in his pocket - book ; it was about spruce - beer .
It is the worst evil of too yielding and indecisive a character , that no influence over it can be depended on .
Elinor saw , with concern , the excess of her sister ' s sensibility ; but by Mrs . Dashwood it was valued and cherished .
Emma said it would be awkward ; Mrs . Weston was in distress about the supper ; and Mr . Woodhouse opposed it earnestly , on the score of health .
" How is she , Miss Dashwood ?-- Poor thing !
" Thank you ," cried Lucy warmly , " for breaking the ice ; you have set my heart at ease by it ; for I was somehow or other afraid I had offended you by what I told you that Monday ."
Mrs . Jennings left them earlier than usual ; for she could not be easy till the Middletons and Palmers were able to grieve as much as herself ; and positively refusing Elinor ' s offered attendance , went out alone for the rest of the morning .
" Phoo !
And now , poor girl !
It was kindly said , and very far from giving offence .
Would not Mr . Knightley shew them the gardens -- all the gardens ?-- She wished to see the whole extent ."
" I cannot agree with you .
You will express yourself very properly , I am sure .
I am monstrous glad of it , for then I shall have her for a neighbour you know ."
" In a stationer ' s shop in Pall Mall , where I had business .
If your sentiments are no longer what they were , you will return my notes , and the lock of my hair which is in your possession .
The dining parlour will admit eighteen couple with ease ; card - tables may be placed in the drawing - room ; the library may be open for tea and other refreshments ; and let the supper be set out in the saloon .'
They had gone , in short -- and very great had been the evident distress and confusion of the lady .
Indeed I do you justice , my good friend .
And , upon my word , he is nothing to me .
Upon the whole , Emma left her with such softened , charitable feelings , as made her look around in walking home , and lament that Highbury afforded no young man worthy of giving her independence ; nobody that she could wish to scheme about for her .
Do not be overpowered by such a little tribute of admiration .
" Perhaps , then , you would bestow it as a reward on that person who wrote the ablest defence of your favourite maxim , that no one can ever be in love more than once in their life -- your opinion on that point is unchanged , I presume ?"
They walked together .
Charles gave it for Louisa , Mary for Henrietta , but quite agreeing that to have him marry either could be extremely delightful .
I really am a most troublesome companion to you both , but I hope I am not often so ill - equipped .
" Have I ?"
These points formed her chief solicitude in anticipating her removal from Uppercross , where she felt she had been stationed quite long enough .
Mr . Elton was all obligation and cheerfulness ; he was so very cheerful in his civilities indeed , that she began to think he must have received a different account of Harriet from what had reached her .
It is a great change ; and though she is amazingly fortunate -- such a situation , I suppose , as no young woman before ever met with on first going out -- do not think us ungrateful , Miss Woodhouse , for such surprising good fortune --( again dispersing her tears )-- but , poor dear soul !
Amongst them were Sir John and Lady Middleton and Mrs . Jennings , but there were two others , a gentleman and lady , who were quite unknown to her .
" Certainly -- very strong it was ; to own the truth , a great deal stronger than , if _I_ had been Miss Campbell , would have been at all agreeable to me .
Both master and man being in mourning assisted the idea .
" She is only grown a little more grave than she was ."
I have not an idea -- I cannot guess it in the least .
I doubt whether he will return the compliment , and discover her to be a lady .
I am no card - player ."
" No , ma ' am , only they two ."
I declare I have not a comfort or an indulgence about me , even at Kellynch Hall ," ( with a kind bow to Anne ), " beyond what I always had in most of the ships I have lived in ; and they have been five altogether ."
" When I talked of your being altered by time , by the progress of years ," said John Knightley , " I meant to imply the change of situation which time usually brings .
She felt that Mrs Musgrove and all her party ought to be asked to dine with them ; but she could not bear to have the difference of style , the reduction of servants , which a dinner must betray , witnessed by those who had been always so inferior to the Elliots of Kellynch .
Where is your merit ?
Lucy here looked up ; but Elinor was careful in guarding her countenance from every expression that could give her words a suspicious tendency .
" My dear Jane , what is this I hear ?-- Going to the post - office in the rain !-- This must not be , I assure you .-- You sad girl , how could you do such a thing ?-- It is a sign I was not there to take care of you ."
Mrs . John Dashwood said nothing ; but her husband civilly hoped that she would not be settled far from Norland .
I am exceedingly sorry : but it is well that the mistake ends where it does .
The toils of the business were over , the sweets began .
I could not bear to have Henry supplanted .-- Mr . Knightley marry !-- No , I have never had such an idea , and I cannot adopt it now .
Something so formal and arrange in her air !
Pity for him was all over .
The Miss Hayters , the females of the family of cousins already mentioned , were apparently admitted to the honour of being in love with him ; and as for Henrietta and Louisa , they both seemed so entirely occupied by him , that nothing but the continued appearance of the most perfect good - will between themselves could have made it credible that they were not decided rivals .
Her legal allowance was not adequate to her fortune , nor sufficient for her comfortable maintenance , and I learnt from my brother that the power of receiving it had been made over some months before to another person .
She was quite in an agony .
They walked on .
and Mrs . Weston is so anxious to be acquainted with him , that she must be almost as happy as yourself ."
said I -- I cannot think who you mean .
" You may esteem him ."
She resolved to prevail on her to spend a day at Hartfield .
" Had you any idea of his coming so soon ?"
Mr . Dashwood was convinced .
" Not your vain spirit , but your serious spirit .-- If one leads you wrong , I am sure the other tells you of it ."
The honour was readily granted , and he then departed , to make himself still more interesting , in the midst of a heavy rain .
Oh !
" No , no , it is not man ' s nature .
Anne found a nice seat for her , on a dry sunny bank , under the hedge - row , in which she had no doubt of their still being , in some spot or other .
Here was a great deal to soften the business .
said Elizabeth ; and without waiting for an answer , " And pray what brings the Crofts to Bath ?"
Anne was still in the lane ; and though instinctively beginning to decline , she was not allowed to proceed .
You begged hard to be commanded to come ."
" Do you think so ?"
I , you may well believe , could talk of nothing but my child ;-- he could not conceal his distress ; I saw that it equalled my own , and he perhaps , thinking that mere friendship , as the world now goes , would not justify so warm a sympathy -- or rather , not thinking at all , I suppose -- giving way to irresistible feelings , made me acquainted with his earnest , tender , constant , affection for Marianne .
" Not the least in the world .-- Did he ever give you any thing ?"
Mrs . Palmer ' s eye was now caught by the drawings which hung round the room .
Wingfield thinks the vicinity of Brunswick Square decidedly the most favourable as to air ."
Good soul !
Look , she made me this bow to my hat , and put in the feather last night .
And his person , his manners too , are all in his favour .
Still , however , she had the sensation of there being something more than immediately appeared , in Mr Elliot ' s wishing , after an interval of so many years , to be well received by them .
Because , if you are , I shall have no scruple in asking you to take my place , and give Anne your arm to her father ' s door .
She gloried in being a sailor ' s wife , but she must pay the tax of quick alarm for belonging to that profession which is , if possible , more distinguished in its domestic virtues than in its national importance .
He did not suppose they could be damp now , in the middle of the day .
Instances have been known of young people passing many , many months successively , without being at any ball of any description , and no material injury accrue either to body or mind ;-- but when a beginning is made -- when the felicities of rapid motion have once been , though slightly , felt -- it must be a very heavy set that does not ask for more .
After a moment ' s pause , he spoke with calmness .
John Dashwood had not much to say for himself that was worth hearing , and his wife had still less .
Poor soul !
" Yes ; all the advantages of sitting still when he ought to move , and of leading a life of mere idle pleasure , and fancying himself extremely expert in finding excuses for it .
He had even refused one regular invitation to dinner ; and having been found on the occasion by Mr Musgrove with some large books before him , Mr and Mrs Musgrove were sure all could not be right , and talked , with grave faces , of his studying himself to death .
Two minutes after her entering the room , Captain Wentworth said --
Mrs . John Dashwood had so much confidence in her husband ' s judgment , that she waited the very next day both on Mrs . Jennings and her daughter ; and her confidence was rewarded by finding even the former , even the woman with whom her sisters were staying , by no means unworthy her notice ; and as for Lady Middleton , she found her one of the most charming women in the world !
As this was a favourite meal with Mrs . Jennings , it lasted a considerable time , and they were just setting themselves , after it , round the common working table , when a letter was delivered to Marianne , which she eagerly caught from the servant , and , turning of a death - like paleness , instantly ran out of the room .
I am almost afraid that every moment will bring him ."
" Oh !
The spring I always think requires more than common care .
The child to be born at Randalls must be a tie there even dearer than herself ; and Mrs . Weston ' s heart and time would be occupied by it .
The intervals of sense and consciousness were believed to be stronger .
You can have no superior , but most true on mine .-- She is a complete angel .
how can you talk so ?
Emma could hardly understand him ; he seemed in an odd humour .
Good - by ; I am sorry Miss Marianne was not here .
" Well ," said Anne , " I certainly am proud , too proud to enjoy a welcome which depends so entirely upon place ."
It was his business , however , to say that he DID , and he said it very prettily .
At the park she laughed at the colonel , and in the cottage at Marianne .
" It will be more painful to me in some respects to be in company with him , but I shall know better what to do .
A Mrs Smith .
And I am sure Lucy would have done just the same by me ; for a year or two back , when Martha Sharpe and I had so many secrets together , she never made any bones of hiding in a closet , or behind a chimney - board , on purpose to hear what we said ."
It struck her with dreadful force , and she was ready to give it every bad name in the world .
I see it in your eye .
She saw that he saw Elizabeth , that Elizabeth saw him , that there was complete internal recognition on each side ; she was convinced that he was ready to be acknowledged as an acquaintance , expecting it , and she had the pain of seeing her sister turn away with unalterable coldness .
" I wish you could persuade Mary not to be always fancying herself ill ," was Charles ' s language ; and , in an unhappy mood , thus spoke Mary : " I do believe if Charles were to see me dying , he would not think there was anything the matter with me .
Well , so much the better for him .
" No ; as soon as she recovered from her lying - in , for I found her near her delivery , I removed her and her child into the country , and there she remains ."
Much as she had suffered from her first conversation with Lucy on the subject , she soon felt an earnest wish of renewing it ; and this for more reasons than one .
This , and Marianne ' s blushing , gave new suspicions to Edward .
Colonel Brandon loves Marianne .
Chapter 21
She would not stir a step , nor drop a hint .
After a few minutes of entire silence between them , John Knightley began with --
Another circumstance very essential for her to know , was how long he meant to be in Bath ; he had not mentioned it , or she could not recollect it .
" Yes , ma ' am , I just see him leaning back in it , but he did not look up ;-- he never was a gentleman much for talking ."
Seven miles were travelled in expectation of enjoyment , and every body had a burst of admiration on first arriving ; but in the general amount of the day there was deficiency .
This was a device , I suppose , to sport with my curiosity , and exercise my talent of guessing .
Must go and speak to Dr . and Mrs . Hughes for a moment .-- How do you do ?
" I declare , Charles , I never heard him mention Anne twice all the time I was there .
yes , yes , there is not a word to be said against James Benwick .
It was a concert for the benefit of a person patronised by Lady Dalrymple .
And one day when Anne was walking with only the Musgroves , one of them after talking of rank , people of rank , and jealousy of rank , said , " I have no scruple of observing to you , how nonsensical some persons are about their place , because all the world knows how easy and indifferent you are about it ; but I wish anybody could give Mary a hint that it would be a great deal better if she were not so very tenacious , especially if she would not be always putting herself forward to take place of mamma .
I hope he will be more agreeable now .
" How is Mary looking ?"
" In this affair it can only do harm ; more so perhaps than in many cases of a similar kind , for it has been attended by circumstances which , for the sake of every one concerned in it , make it unfit to become the public conversation .
" The sooner every party breaks up , the better ."
She had only two daughters , both of whom she had lived to see respectably married , and she had now therefore nothing to do but to marry all the rest of the world .
What brother on earth would do half so much for his sisters , even if REALLY his sisters !
It will only be sending Betty by the coach , and I hope I can afford THAT .
But for Harriet ' s sake , or rather for my own , and as there are no husbands and wives in the case _at_ _present_ , I will break my resolution now ."
However , I am much happier as I am .
And so does poor Mrs . Weston "-- with half a sigh and half a smile at her .
But you see , every thing turns out for the best .
Her complexion was sallow ; and her features small , without beauty , and naturally without expression ; but a lucky contraction of the brow had rescued her countenance from the disgrace of insipidity , by giving it the strong characters of pride and ill nature .
She was previously disposed , I believe , to doubt the morality of my conduct in general , and was moreover discontented with the very little attention , the very little portion of my time that I had bestowed on her , in my present visit .
It was quite a sudden thing our coming at all , and I knew nothing of it till the carriage was coming to the door , and then Mr . Palmer asked me if I would go with him to Barton .
She had nothing to wish otherwise , but that the days did not pass so swiftly .
But there was no peculiar disgrace in this ; for it was very much the case with the chief of their visitors , who almost all laboured under one or other of these disqualifications for being agreeable -- Want of sense , either natural or improved -- want of elegance -- want of spirits -- or want of temper .
" Don ' t class us together , Harriet .
Such expressions , assisted as they were by every thing that look and manner could do , made Emma feel that she had never loved Harriet so well , nor valued her affection so highly before .
Her manners had all the elegance which her husband ' s wanted .
Of course , he must be sorry to lose her -- they must be all sorry .
We had not been six hours in the Sound , when a gale came on , which lasted four days and nights , and which would have done for poor old Asp in half the time ; our touch with the Great Nation not having much improved our condition .
Two maids and two men , indeed !-- as I talked of t ' other day .-- No , no , they must get a stout girl of all works .-- Betty ' s sister would never do for them NOW ."
Ay , this comes of the peace .
But as to the rest , as to the others , if one stays to assist Mrs Harville , I think it need be only one .
In short , it ended in a total breach .
And I have no doubt that he _will_ thrive , and be a very rich man in time -- and his being illiterate and coarse need not disturb _us_ ."
" Oh !
He lived about a mile from Highbury , was a frequent visitor , and always welcome , and at this time more welcome than usual , as coming directly from their mutual connexions in London .
Just as your drawings always are , my dear .
Anne could not immediately fall into a quotation again .
If Frank Churchill had wanted to see his father , he would have contrived it between September and January .
He stopt at their gate .
" Well , Miss Woodhouse ," said Harriet , when they had quitted the house , and after waiting in vain for her friend to begin ; " Well , Miss Woodhouse , ( with a gentle sigh ,) what do you think of her ?-- Is not she very charming ?"
` Lady Wentworth ' sounds very well .
She was accordingly more guarded , and more cool , than she had been the night before .
In a hurried manner , he replied in the affirmative .
You have drawn two pretty pictures ; but I think there may be a third -- a something between the do - nothing and the do - all .
Harriet listened , and Emma drew in peace .
There is no reason on earth why Mr . Edward and Lucy should not marry ; for I am sure Mrs . Ferrars may afford to do very well by her son , and though Lucy has next to nothing herself , she knows better than any body how to make the most of every thing ; I dare say , if Mrs . Ferrars would only allow him five hundred a - year , she would make as good an appearance with it as any body else would with eight .
His head is full of some books that he is reading upon your recommendation , and he wants to talk to you about them ; he has found out something or other in one of them which he thinks -- oh !
cried Sir Basil , ` it is Admiral Baldwin .
We will not be parted .
she is dead !"
This happened the night before last .
We have seen nothing of him since November .
" Has he been here on this occasion -- or has he not ?"
" I was wrong ," he continued , " in talking of its being _broke_ to you .
Dear Jane , how shall we ever recollect half the dishes for grandmama ?
" I am afraid Jane is not very well ," said she , " but I do not know ; they _tell_ me she is well .
' tis a nice place !
You will stay , and go with us ?"
dear ; I was so miserable !
She wished him very well ; but he gave her pain , and his welfare twenty miles off would administer most satisfaction .
That Lucy had certainly meant to deceive , to go off with a flourish of malice against him in her message by Thomas , was perfectly clear to Elinor ; and Edward himself , now thoroughly enlightened on her character , had no scruple in believing her capable of the utmost meanness of wanton ill - nature .
His spirits required support .
What Lucy had asserted to be true , therefore , Elinor could not , dared not longer doubt ; supported as it was too on every side by such probabilities and proofs , and contradicted by nothing but her own wishes .
" I am glad you think I have been useful to her ; but Harriet only wanted drawing out , and receiving a few , very few hints .
We lived for enjoyment .
Elinor did feel a little ashamed of her brother ; and was not sorry to be spared the necessity of answering him , by the arrival of Mrs . Jennings ' s servant , who came to tell her that his mistress waited for them at the door .
I could not excuse a man ' s having more music than love -- more ear than eye -- a more acute sensibility to fine sounds than to my feelings .
For a few days , every morning visit in Highbury included some mention of the handsome letter Mrs . Weston had received .
" It was a foolish , idle inclination on my side ," said he , " the consequence of ignorance of the world -- and want of employment .
A complete change of life became desirable .
There will be a great many people talking at once .
I have been thinking whether you had not better remain in the carriage with her , while I go in and break it to Mr and Mrs Musgrove .
" Yes , why should I stay here ?
" My dear madam !
Jane Fairfax had already quitted Highbury , and was restored to the comforts of her beloved home with the Campbells .-- The Mr . Churchills were also in town ; and they were only waiting for November .
.
Now there is no one to regard them .
No , my dearest Marianne , you must wait .
I hope , from the bottom of my heart , he won ' t keep her waiting much longer , for it is quite grievous to see her look so ill and forlorn .
The Doctor is no beau of mine ."
She believed every body spoke well of him .
How could you behave so unfairly by your sister ?"
It did , however .-- Her father was quite taken up with the surprize of so sudden a journey , and his fears that Mr . Elton might never get safely to the end of it , and saw nothing extraordinary in his language .
His mother wished to interest him in political concerns , to get him into parliament , or to see him connected with some of the great men of the day .
" Upon my soul ," said he , " I do not know much about him as to all THAT .
" Lessening , I understand ," replied Mrs Smith .
" To fall in with each other on such an errand as this ," thought Emma ; " to meet in a charitable scheme ; this will bring a great increase of love on each side .
but such old friends as Lucy and me !-- I think she might see US ; and I am sure we would not speak a word ."
It would be unpardonable to fail .
she would not have forgotten him so soon !"
She was in dancing , singing , exclaiming spirits ; and till she had moved about , and talked to herself , and laughed and reflected , she could be fit for nothing rational .
Marianne pressed her hand and replied ,
Let those who would be happy be firm .
Henceforward I know nothing of the matter .
Anne heard her , and made no violent exclamations ; she only smiled , blushed , and gently shook her head .
Elinor drew near , but without saying a word ; and seating herself on the bed , took her hand , kissed her affectionately several times , and then gave way to a burst of tears , which at first was scarcely less violent than Marianne ' s .
Name your day , and I will come .
" But indeed this is quite another thing .
A few hours were to have engaged her to me for ever ; and I remember how happy , how gay were my spirits , as I walked from the cottage to Allenham , satisfied with myself , delighted with every body !
" Excellent indeed .
After staying with them half an hour , he asked Elinor to walk with him to Conduit Street , and introduce him to Sir John and Lady Middleton .
His company so sought after , that every body says he need not eat a single meal by himself if he does not chuse it ; that he has more invitations than there are days in the week .
cried Jane , with a blush and an hesitation which Emma thought infinitely more becoming to her than all the elegance of all her usual composure --" there would have been no danger .
I saw a vast deal of that in the neighbourhood round Maple Grove .
His collar - bone was found to be dislocated , and such injury received in the back , as roused the most alarming ideas .
He was very much vexed .
" So very kind !"
While well , and happy , and properly attended to , she had great good humour and excellent spirits ; but any indisposition sunk her completely .
The chance proved a lucky one , for a message from Mrs . Palmer soon after she arrived , carried Mrs . Jennings away .
This was the season of happiness to Marianne .
A short period of exquisite felicity followed , and but a short one .
Anne herself would have found the mortifications of it more than she foresaw , and to Sir Walter ' s feelings they must have been dreadful .
If he had come at Christmas he could not have staid three days ; I was always glad he did not come at Christmas ; now we are going to have just the right weather for him , fine , dry , settled weather .
I have valued myself on honourable toils and just rewards .
The Eltons walked together ; Mr . Knightley took charge of Miss Bates and Jane ; and Emma and Harriet belonged to Frank Churchill .
" Sir Henry Russell ' s widow , indeed , has no honours to distinguish her arms , but still it is a handsome equipage , and no doubt is well known to convey a Miss Elliot .
" He intends to send his groom into Somersetshire immediately for it ," she added , " and when it arrives we will ride every day .
" No -- I cannot call them gifts ; but they are things that I have valued very much ."
" I have no doubt of his being a most amiable young man .
it was such an inexpressible obligation !-- The very recollection of it , and all that I felt at the time -- when I saw him coming -- his noble look -- and my wretchedness before .
Perhaps in the spring , if I have plenty of money , as I dare say I shall , we may think about building .
With all these circumstances , recollections and feelings , she could not hear that Captain Wentworth ' s sister was likely to live at Kellynch without a revival of former pain ; and many a stroll , and many a sigh , were necessary to dispel the agitation of the idea .
Marianne here burst forth with indignation --
She had hardly spoken the words when Mr Elliot walked in .
It was impossible to say how much he should be gratified by being employed on such an errand ."
This peace will be turning all our rich naval officers ashore .
" No , indeed -- _we_ are not at all in a bad air .
Their first meeting in Milsom Street afforded much to be said , but the concert still more .
Emma was not sorry to have such an opportunity of survey ; and walking a few yards forward , while they talked together , soon made her quick eye sufficiently acquainted with Mr . Robert Martin .
We were speaking the other day , you know , of his being so warm an admirer of her performance ."
She had given him up to oblige others .
What strength , or what constancy of affection he might be subject to , was another point ; but at present she could not doubt his having a decidedly warm admiration , a conscious preference of herself ; and this persuasion , joined to all the rest , made her think that she _must_ be a little in love with him , in spite of every previous determination against it .
There was one person among his new acquaintance in Surry , not so leniently disposed .
" It would be very hard , indeed , my dear , if poor Isabella were to be anywhere but at Hartfield ."
She had suffered very much from cramp after dancing , and her first attempt to mount the bank brought on such a return of it as made her absolutely powerless -- and in this state , and exceedingly terrified , she had been obliged to remain .
" It is not fair ," said Emma , in a whisper ; " mine was a random guess .
In Bond Street especially , where much of their business lay , her eyes were in constant inquiry ; and in whatever shop the party were engaged , her mind was equally abstracted from every thing actually before them , from all that interested and occupied the others .
I do assure you that nothing would surprise me more than to hear of their being going to be married ."
Charles heard it quite by chance ; they have not had the civility to give me any notice , or of offering to take anything .
He had a great regard for Mrs . Goddard ; and Emma should write a line , and invite her .
" And the staircase -- You know , as I came in , I observed how very like the staircase was ; placed exactly in the same part of the house .
What is right to be done cannot be done too soon .
" Well , then , he is lately dead , Marianne , for I am sure there was such a man once , and his name begins with an F ."
and she answered the question , smiling also , " Yes .
Elinor DID think the question a very odd one , and her countenance expressed it , as she answered that she had never seen Mrs . Ferrars .
I do not think they improve at all as neighbours .
" That may be -- but not by sketches in Swisserland .
Sir Walter had once been in company with the late viscount , but had never seen any of the rest of the family ; and the difficulties of the case arose from there having been a suspension of all intercourse by letters of ceremony , ever since the death of that said late viscount , when , in consequence of a dangerous illness of Sir Walter ' s at the same time , there had been an unlucky omission at Kellynch .
Her father was growing distressed for money .
When they had paid their tribute of politeness by curtsying to the lady of the house , they were permitted to mingle in the crowd , and take their share of the heat and inconvenience , to which their arrival must necessarily add .
In all probability she was at this very time waited for there ; and Mr . Knightley might be preserved from sinking deeper in aggression towards Mr . Elton , if not towards William Larkins .
Could she have believed it a week ago ; three hours ago !
I cannot let you continue in your error ; and yet , perhaps , since my manners gave such an impression , I have as much reason to be ashamed of confessing that I never have been at all attached to the person we are speaking of , as it might be natural for a woman to feel in confessing exactly the reverse .-- But I never have ."
" Perhaps ," said Willoughby , " his observations may have extended to the existence of nabobs , gold mohrs , and palanquins ."
Her husband , however , would not agree with her here ; for besides having a regard for his cousin , Charles Hayter was an eldest son , and he saw things as an eldest son himself .
He would save himself from witnessing again such permitted , encouraged attentions .-- He had gone to learn to be indifferent .-- But he had gone to a wrong place .
It was a sad change .
I wish she had accepted him .
Louisa was now recovering apace .
How could it ever be ascertained that his mind was truly cleansed ?
It was not merely in fine words or hyperbolical compliment that he paid his duty ; nothing could be more proper or pleasing than his whole manner to her -- nothing could more agreeably denote his wish of considering her as a friend and securing her affection .
It would have grieved me to lose your acquaintance , which must have been the consequence of your marrying Mr . Martin .
Could anything be so flattering as Mrs . Ferrars ' s way of treating me yesterday ?
He is generally thought a fine young man , but do not expect a prodigy .
" I perfectly agree with you , sir ,"-- was then his remark .
As the head of the house , he felt that he ought to have been consulted , especially after taking the young man so publicly by the hand ; " For they must have been seen together ," he observed , " once at Tattersall ' s , and twice in the lobby of the House of Commons ."
Her imagination was busy , her reflections were pleasant , and the pain of a sprained ankle was disregarded .
Soldiers , in active service , are not at all better off : and even in the quieter professions , there is a toil and a labour of the mind , if not of the body , which seldom leaves a man ' s looks to the natural effect of time .
Miss Bates would hardly give Emma time to say how perfectly new this circumstance was to her ; but as without supposing it possible that she could be ignorant of any of the particulars of Mr . Frank Churchill ' s going , she proceeded to give them all , it was of no consequence .
Willoughby , he , whom only half an hour ago she had abhorred as the most worthless of men , Willoughby , in spite of all his faults , excited a degree of commiseration for the sufferings produced by them , which made her think of him as now separated for ever from her family , with a tenderness , a regret , rather in proportion , as she soon acknowledged within herself -- to his wishes than to his merits .
Goddard ' s ."
Soon , however , she began to reason with herself , and try to be feeling less .
How is it to be supposed that Willoughby , persuaded as he must be of your sister ' s love , should leave her , and leave her perhaps for months , without telling her of his affection ;-- that they should part without a mutual exchange of confidence ?"
Depend upon it , that is a circumstance which his servants take care to publish , wherever he goes .
" You would not be six hours later ," said Willoughby , " if you were to defer your journey till our return ."
well !"
Sir Walter , on being applied to , without actually withholding his consent , or saying it should never be , gave it all the negative of great astonishment , great coldness , great silence , and a professed resolution of doing nothing for his daughter .
It seemed as if she had been one moment too late ; and as long as she dared observe , he did not look again : but the performance was recommencing , and she was forced to seem to restore her attention to the orchestra and look straight forward .
" Very bad -- though it might have been worse .-- Playing a most dangerous game .
Consider , my father ' s heir : the future representative of the family ."
I found them on the most friendly terms when I arrived ."
united , what reverse we have !
Such a sad loss to our party to - day !"
My journey to town -- travelling with my own horses , and therefore so tediously -- no creature to speak to -- my own reflections so cheerful -- when I looked forward every thing so inviting !-- when I looked back at Barton , the picture so soothing !-- oh , it was a blessed journey !"
" But who is he ?"
Such was the sentence which , when misunderstood , so justly offended the delicate feelings of Mrs . Jennings ; but after this narration of what really passed between Colonel Brandon and Elinor , while they stood at the window , the gratitude expressed by the latter on their parting , may perhaps appear in general , not less reasonably excited , nor less properly worded than if it had arisen from an offer of marriage .
A few years however will settle her opinions on the reasonable basis of common sense and observation ; and then they may be more easy to define and to justify than they now are , by any body but herself ."
The horror and distress you were involved in , the stretch of mind , the wear of spirits !
While she remained , a bush of low rambling holly protected her , and they were moving on .
Sir John , could not have thought it possible .
Everything in and about the house would be taken such excellent care of !
" Elegant , agreeable manners , I was prepared for ," said he ; " but I confess that , considering every thing , I had not expected more than a very tolerably well - looking woman of a certain age ; I did not know that I was to find a pretty young woman in Mrs .
Elinor was robbed of all presence of mind by such an address , and was unable to say a word .
He rose from his seat , and walked to the window , apparently from not knowing what to do ; took up a pair of scissors that lay there , and while spoiling both them and their sheath by cutting the latter to pieces as he spoke , said , in a hurried voice ,
He was evidently a young man of considerable taste in reading , though principally in poetry ; and besides the persuasion of having given him at least an evening ' s indulgence in the discussion of subjects , which his usual companions had probably no concern in , she had the hope of being of real use to him in some suggestions as to the duty and benefit of struggling against affliction , which had naturally grown out of their conversation .
" You do quite right ," said she ;--" we will make your apologies to Mr . and Mrs .
While he spoke , Emma ' s mind was most busy , and , with all the wonderful velocity of thought , had been able -- and yet without losing a word -- to catch and comprehend the exact truth of the whole ; to see that Harriet ' s hopes had been entirely groundless , a mistake , a delusion , as complete a delusion as any of her own -- that Harriet was nothing ; that she was every thing herself ; that what she had been saying relative to Harriet had been all taken as the language of her own feelings ; and that her agitation , her doubts , her reluctance , her discouragement , had been all received as discouragement from herself .-- And not only was there time for these convictions , with all their glow of attendant happiness ; there was time also to rejoice that Harriet ' s secret had not escaped her , and to resolve that it need not , and should not .-- It was all the service she could now render her poor friend ; for as to any of that heroism of sentiment which might have prompted her to entreat him to transfer his affection from herself to Harriet , as infinitely the most worthy of the two -- or even the more simple sublimity of resolving to refuse him at once and for ever , without vouchsafing any motive , because he could not marry them both , Emma had it not .
They were soon joined by some of the gentlemen ; and the very first of the early was Frank Churchill .
" And here is my sweet little Annamaria ," she added , tenderly caressing a little girl of three years old , who had not made a noise for the last two minutes ; " And she is always so gentle and quiet -- Never was there such a quiet little thing !"
The first heedless scheme had been to go in the morning and return at night ; but to this Mr Musgrove , for the sake of his horses , would not consent ; and when it came to be rationally considered , a day in the middle of November would not leave much time for seeing a new place , after deducting seven hours , as the nature of the country required , for going and returning .
I am particularly glad to see and shake hands with you -- and to give you joy in person ."
" Yes ," said he , smiling .
Lord !
" It is very natural .
a smart , stylish girl they say , but not handsome .
The plan was that she should be brought up for educating others ; the very few hundred pounds which she inherited from her father making independence impossible .
So far from having long understood you , I have been in a most complete error with respect to your views , till this moment .
would I be turned back from doing a thing that I had determined to do , and that I knew to be right , by the airs and interference of such a person , or of any person I may say ?
Money , money , was all that he wanted .
Jane said so .
This may be bad morality to conclude with , but I believe it to be truth ; and if such parties succeed , how should a Captain Wentworth and an Anne Elliot , with the advantage of maturity of mind , consciousness of right , and one independent fortune between them , fail of bearing down every opposition ?
Had I remained in England , perhaps -- but I meant to promote the happiness of both by removing from her for years , and for that purpose had procured my exchange .
She was his object , and every body must perceive it .
Hour after hour passed away in sleepless pain and delirium on Marianne ' s side , and in the most cruel anxiety on Elinor ' s , before Mr . Harris appeared .
CHAPTER XIII
However , when I found how excessively he was regretting that he should miss my father this morning , I gave way immediately , for I would never really omit an opportunity of bring him and Sir Walter together .
" I must endeavour to subdue my mind to my fortune .
It holds nine .
Isabella cannot bear to stay behind her husband ."
In the course of the same morning , Anne and her father chancing to be alone together , he began to compliment her on her improved looks ; he thought her " less thin in her person , in her cheeks ; her skin , her complexion , greatly improved ; clearer , fresher .
How does Charlotte do ?
A long time , is not it , for a cold to hang upon her ?
Anne ' s object was , not to be in the way of anybody ; and where the narrow paths across the fields made many separations necessary , to keep with her brother and sister .
They had nearly done breakfast , when the sound of a carriage , ( almost the first they had heard since entering Lyme ) drew half the party to the window .
" Jane caught a bad cold , poor thing !
Elinor ' s uneasiness was at least equal to her mother ' s .
Willoughby could not hear of her marriage without a pang ; and his punishment was soon afterwards complete in the voluntary forgiveness of Mrs . Smith , who , by stating his marriage with a woman of character , as the source of her clemency , gave him reason for believing that had he behaved with honour towards Marianne , he might at once have been happy and rich .
She was then interrupted by Harriet ' s coming in ; and if Harriet ' s praise could have satisfied her , she might soon have been comforted .
Mr . Knightley looked as if he were more gratified than he cared to express ; and before he could make any reply , Mr . Woodhouse , whose thoughts were on the Bates ' s , said --
I want to have your opinion of her looks .
I could not derive benefit from the late knowledge I had acquired of your character .
cried Marianne , " he has been here while we were out ."
A child on the watch , came towards them to beg ; and Miss Bickerton , excessively frightened , gave a great scream , and calling on Harriet to follow her , ran up a steep bank , cleared a slight hedge at the top , and made the best of her way by a short cut back to Highbury .
Mrs . Cole seemed to be relating something of her that was expected to be very interesting .
Emma could not bear to give him pain .
" You have said so ," replied Elinor , " almost every day since they first met on High - church Down ; and they had not known each other a week , I believe , before you were certain that Marianne wore his picture round her neck ; but it turned out to be only the miniature of our great uncle ."
" I rather think you are mistaken , for when I was talking to her yesterday of getting a new grate for the spare bedchamber , she observed that there was no immediate hurry for it , as it was not likely that the room would be wanted for some time ."
He has no feeling for others .
CHAPTER X
Do not you hear your aunt speak ?
Were you , yourself , ever to marry , she is the very woman for you .
Michaelmas came ; and now Anne ' s heart must be in Kellynch again .
" Yes , I saw every note that passed ."
They contained a noble piece of water ; a sail on which was to a form a great part of the morning ' s amusement ; cold provisions were to be taken , open carriages only to be employed , and every thing conducted in the usual style of a complete party of pleasure .
Nonsense !
" My Emma , he means no such thing .
In the present case it took up ten minutes to determine whether the boy were most like his father or mother , and in what particular he resembled either , for of course every body differed , and every body was astonished at the opinion of the others .
Two ladies were waiting for their carriage , and one of them was giving the other an account of the intended match , in a voice so little attempting concealment , that it was impossible for me not to hear all .
Mrs . Palmer was so well at the end of a fortnight , that her mother felt it no longer necessary to give up the whole of her time to her ; and , contenting herself with visiting her once or twice a day , returned from that period to her own home , and her own habits , in which she found the Miss Dashwoods very ready to resume their former share .
" There , exactly there ,"-- pointing with one hand , " on that projecting mound ,-- there I fell ; and there I first saw Willoughby ."
May be she is ill in town ; nothing in the world more likely , for I have a notion she is always rather sickly .
" Oh !
Her curiosity was greatly excited .
Their respectability was as dear to her as her own , and a daily intercourse had become precious by habit .
" Oh yes , sir ," cried she with ready sympathy , " how you must miss her !
Compare Mr . Martin with either of _them_ .
His chance for the Kellynch estate was something , but all the honour of the family he held as cheap as dirt .
" But you would still be reserved ," said Marianne , " and that is worse ."
He was looked on as sufficiently belonging to the place to make his merits and prospects a kind of common concern .
" Pray , Emma ," said he , " may I ask in what lay the great amusement , the poignant sting of the last word given to you and Miss Fairfax ?
It was an awkward ceremony at any time to be receiving wedding visits , and a man had need be all grace to acquit himself well through it .
You may be very sure that if I had , I should have cautioned you accordingly ."
She listened , and found it well worth listening to .
" I do not know , my dear -- but it is so long since she was here !-- not since last Easter , and then only for a few days .-- Mr .
The portraits themselves seemed to be staring in astonishment .
What I felt on hearing that your sister was dying -- and dying too , believing me the greatest villain upon earth , scorning , hating me in her latest moments -- for how could I tell what horrid projects might not have been imputed ?
" Mr . Elton going to be married !"
" And the bulk of your fortune would be laid out in annuities on the authors or their heirs ."
how concerned Sir John and my daughters will be when they hear it !
But it is his gratitude on Harriet ' s account ."
I will invite your guests ."
Perry !-- such attention to Jane !"
How did you think the Coxes looked ?"
The sister , Mrs Croft , had then been out of England , accompanying her husband on a foreign station , and her own sister , Mary , had been at school while it all occurred ; and never admitted by the pride of some , and the delicacy of others , to the smallest knowledge of it afterwards .
And all the grandeur of the connexion seemed dependent on the elder sister , who was _very_ _well_ _married_ , to a gentleman in a _great_ _way_ , near Bristol , who kept two carriages !
It was the very event to engage those who talk most , the young and the low ; and all the youth and servants in the place were soon in the happiness of frightful news .
Harriet was very ready to speak of the share he had had in their moonlight walks and merry evening games ; and dwelt a good deal upon his being so very good - humoured and obliging .
They ascended and passed him ; and as they passed , Anne ' s face caught his eye , and he looked at her with a degree of earnest admiration , which she could not be insensible of .
Not a soul suspected anything of the matter , not even Nancy , who , poor soul !
She is a standing lesson of how to be happy .
While we were together , you know , there was nothing to be feared .
" To me it is faultless .
" No , I do not ; that is , I do not mean -- What shall I do ?
That was well done of me ; but there I should have stopped , and left the rest to time and chance .
They all waited in silence for the appearance of their visitor .
" It is too much !
" Has your son been with you , then ?"
--
She was in the carriage , and felt that he had placed her there , that his will and his hands had done it , that she owed it to his perception of her fatigue , and his resolution to give her rest .
This , Harriet , is an alliance which can never raise a blush in either of us ."
She began by inquiring if they saw much of Mr . Willoughby at Cleveland , and whether they were intimately acquainted with him .
Emma sat with her as long as she could , to attend her in Mrs . Goddard ' s unavoidable absences , and raise her spirits by representing how much Mr . Elton ' s would be depressed when he knew her state ; and left her at last tolerably comfortable , in the sweet dependence of his having a most comfortless visit , and of their all missing her very much .
Palmer ?"
I was quite surprized ;-- very glad , I am sure ; but really quite surprized .
Emma waited the result with impatience , but not without strong hopes .
It must have been about the same time that he became known to my father and sister .
I hope not of a putrid infectious sort .
I am not fond of the idea of my shrubberies being always approachable ; and I should recommend Miss Elliot to be on her guard with respect to her flower garden .
Marianne had at first the advantage , but a false step brought her suddenly to the ground ; and Margaret , unable to stop herself to assist her , was involuntarily hurried along , and reached the bottom in safety .
" I do not want to pry into other men ' s concerns .
" That is a material consideration undoubtedly .
" Mr . Weston would undoubtedly support me , if he were here , for he thinks exactly as I do on the subject .
" You would not have encouraged me , then , if you had understood me ?
The children are all hanging about her already , as if she was an old acquaintance .
We have never been there above once since the new approach was made ; but still I have no doubt that James will take you very safely .
Her spirits still continued very high ; but there was a flutter in them which prevented their giving much pleasure to her sister , and this agitation increased as the evening drew on .
Weston ."
Her views of improving her little friend ' s mind , by a great deal of useful reading and conversation , had never yet led to more than a few first chapters , and the intention of going on to - morrow .
The triumph of seeing me so may be open to all the world .
She wondered , with little intermission what could be the reason of it ; was sure there must be some bad news , and thought over every kind of distress that could have befallen him , with a fixed determination that he should not escape them all .
leave all that to me .
You have scolded me too much for match - making , for me to presume to take such a liberty with you .
Preparation !-- day !-- In honest words , her money was necessary to me , and in a situation like mine , any thing was to be done to prevent a rupture .
So peculiarly the lady in it .-- Just colour enough for beauty ."
Let no name ever pass our lips .
" You shall ; and , to be brief , when I quitted Barton last October ,-- but this will give you no idea -- I must go farther back .
" Nay ," cried Mrs . Jennings , " I am sure I shall be monstrous glad of Miss Marianne ' s company , whether Miss Dashwood will go or not , only the more the merrier say I , and I thought it would be more comfortable for them to be together ; because , if they got tired of me , they might talk to one another , and laugh at my old ways behind my back .
" Edward talks of going to Oxford soon ," said she ; " but now he is lodging at No .
" Had not she better be carried to the inn ?
.
However small Elinor ' s general dependence on Lucy ' s veracity might be , it was impossible for her on serious reflection to suspect it in the present case , where no temptation could be answerable to the folly of inventing a falsehood of such a description .
He knows nothing of it ; do tell him , my dear ."
" I would not ask such a question for the world .
Mr . John Dashwood had not the strong feelings of the rest of the family ; but he was affected by a recommendation of such a nature at such a time , and he promised to do every thing in his power to make them comfortable .
" Nor do I think it a part of Marianne ' s ," said Elinor ; " I should hardly call her a lively girl -- she is very earnest , very eager in all she does -- sometimes talks a great deal and always with animation -- but she is not often really merry ."
He positively said that it had been known to no being in the world but their two selves ."
" But I thought it was right , Elinor ," said Marianne , " to be guided wholly by the opinion of other people .
If it can be contrived to be at the Crown , papa , it will be very convenient for the horses .
" It was necessary to my own pride .
Mr . Frank Churchill , indeed !
But indeed , my dear , you need not be uneasy .
Depend upon it , we shall soon hear that it is a present from Mr . and Mrs .
You were very popular before you came , because you were Mr . Weston ' s son -- but lay out half a guinea at Ford ' s , and your popularity will stand upon your own virtues ."
He knows that he is a very handsome young man , and a great favourite wherever he goes ; and from his general way of talking in unreserved moments , when there are only men present , I am convinced that he does not mean to throw himself away .
Louisa ' s limbs had escaped .
Weston ?-- To Bath , or to Clifton ?"
" Certainly , ma ' am , I shall tell Marianne of it ; but I shall not mention it at present to any body else ."
" Oh !
" I have a great curiosity to see Mrs . Elton , I have heard so much of her .
Elinor , I am miserable , indeed ," before her voice was entirely lost in sobs .
I undertake the commission .
I declare they are quite charming ; I could look at them for ever ."
He was welcomed by them all with great cordiality , but especially by Marianne , who showed more warmth of regard in her reception of him than even Elinor herself .
Seats tolerably in the shade were found ; and now Emma was obliged to overhear what Mrs . Elton and Jane Fairfax were talking of .-- A situation , a most desirable situation , was in question .
I thought I heard a carriage last night , while we were drinking our tea , but it never entered my head that it could be them .
" Engaged since October ,-- secretly engaged .-- It has hurt me , Emma , very much .
Something occurred while they were at Hartfield , to make Emma want their advice ; and , which was still more lucky , she wanted exactly the advice they gave .
Elinor now found the difference between the expectation of an unpleasant event , however certain the mind may be told to consider it , and certainty itself .
I do not think it could disagree with you ."
" I should guess so ," said Elinor , with a smile , " from what I have witnessed this morning ."
The result of his thoughts appeared at last in these words .
The evening before this great event ( for it was a very great event that Mr . Woodhouse should dine out , on the 24th of December ) had been spent by Harriet at Hartfield , and she had gone home so much indisposed with a cold , that , but for her own earnest wish of being nursed by Mrs . Goddard , Emma could not have allowed her to leave the house .
He considered his disposition as of the sort which must suffer heavily , uniting very strong feelings with quiet , serious , and retiring manners , and a decided taste for reading , and sedentary pursuits .
These letters were but the vehicle for gallantry and trick .
" Yes , to be sure , I suppose there are .
Mr . Weston , do not mistake me .
One perplexity , however , arose , which the gentlemen did not disdain .
Her many beginnings were displayed .
I congratulate you , my dear Harriet , with all my heart .
The evening was quiet and conversable , as Mr . Woodhouse declined cards entirely for the sake of comfortable talk with his dear Isabella , and the little party made two natural divisions ; on one side he and his daughter ; on the other the two Mr . Knightleys ; their subjects totally distinct , or very rarely mixing -- and Emma only occasionally joining in one or the other .
Some little present of furniture too may be acceptable then ."
She sighed for the air , the liberty , the quiet of the country ; and fancied that if any place could give her ease , Barton must do it .
Marianne was afraid of offending , and said no more on the subject ; but the kind of approbation which Elinor described as excited in him by the drawings of other people , was very far from that rapturous delight , which , in her opinion , could alone be called taste .
Be it known then , that Sir Walter , like a good father , ( having met with one or two private disappointments in very unreasonable applications ), prided himself on remaining single for his dear daughters ' sake .
She sat in an agony of impatience which affected every feature .
I want to puzzle you again ."
Whatever be his pursuits , his eagerness in them should know no moderation , and leave him no sense of fatigue ."
What queer fellows your fine painters must be , to think that anybody would venture their lives in such a shapeless old cockleshell as that ?
" But was not she a very low woman ?"
His attentive behaviour to herself and his sisters convinced her that their welfare was dear to him , and , for a long time , she firmly relied on the liberality of his intentions .
-- Those were the words ; in them lay the tormenting ideas which Emma could not get rid of , and which constituted the real misery of the business to her .
" That may be , and I may have seen him fifty times , but without having any idea of his name .
She was a widow and poor .
If I were to shut myself up for ever with the child , I should not be able to persuade him to do anything he did not like .
" Know him !
She gained on them , however , involuntarily : the child ' s pace was quick , and theirs rather slow ; and she was the more concerned at it , from their being evidently in a conversation which interested them .
Mrs . Weston had , of course , formed a very favourable idea of the young man ; and such a pleasing attention was an irresistible proof of his great good sense , and a most welcome addition to every source and every expression of congratulation which her marriage had already secured .
Sir Frederick and Lady Wentworth !
She must know as well as her father , how acceptable an instrument would be ; and perhaps the mode of it , the mystery , the surprize , is more like a young woman ' s scheme than an elderly man ' s .
" Ah !
Elinor perceived with alarm that she was not quite herself , and , while attempting to soothe her , eagerly felt her pulse .
Charles laughed again and said , " Now Mary , you know very well how it really was .
I did not know that I had fixed a day , but as he says I did , I am going now ."
I assured him that I could not .
" I cannot imagine ," said Mrs . Elton , ( feeling the indignity as a wife ought to do ,) " I cannot imagine how he could do such a thing by you , of all people in the world !
This was very proper ; the sigh which accompanied it was really estimable ; but it should have lasted longer .
I will tell you the whole story another time .
" Marianne is as steadfast as ever , you see ," said Elinor , " she is not at all altered ."
" Well !
We always say what we like to one another ."
A Miss Hawkins --"
Willoughby opened the piano - forte , and asked Marianne to sit down to it ; and thus amidst the various endeavours of different people to quit the topic , it fell to the ground .
She was perfectly disposed to make every allowance for the colonel ' s advanced state of life which humanity required .
" We may treat it as a joke ," said he , at last , recovering from the affected laugh which had considerably lengthened out the genuine gaiety of the moment --" but , upon my soul , it is a most serious business .
Marianne had left the room before the conversation began .
But she is really quite the gentlewoman ."
" And mine ," said Mr . Knightley warmly , " is , that if he turn out any thing like it , he will be the most insufferable fellow breathing !
She cast her eye over it , pondered , caught the meaning , read it through again to be quite certain , and quite mistress of the lines , and then passing it to Harriet , sat happily smiling , and saying to herself , while Harriet was puzzling over the paper in all the confusion of hope and dulness , " Very well , Mr . Elton , very well indeed .
Confess , Marianne , is not there something interesting to you in the flushed cheek , hollow eye , and quick pulse of a fever ?"
So Emma thought , at least .
Marianne felt for her most sincerely ; but she did more harm than good to the cause , by turning very red and saying in an angry manner to Margaret ,
Emma was not thinking of it at the moment , which made the information she received more valuable .
" I think you are very likely to suffer the most of the two ; your feelings are less reconciled to the change than mine .
dear , Miss Woodhouse -- well , at last , I fancy , he looked round and saw me ; for instead of going on with her buyings , they began whispering to one another .
" Oh yes ; next week ."
Elinor would not attempt to disturb a solitude so reasonable as what she now sought ; and with a mind anxiously pre - arranging its result , and a resolution of reviving the subject again , should Marianne fail to do it , she turned into the parlour to fulfill her parting injunction .
She does not know how to hold her tongue , as you must perceive , and I am sure I was in the greatest fright in the world t ' other day , when Edward ' s name was mentioned by Sir John , lest she should out with it all .
What , in heaven ' s name , is to be done next ?"
" And you will never see me otherwise .
I see no sign of attachment -- I believe nothing of the pianoforte -- and proof only shall convince me that Mr . Knightley has any thought of marrying Jane Fairfax ."
" If not in our dispositions ," she presently added , with a look of true sensibility , " there is a likeness in our destiny ; the destiny which bids fair to connect us with two characters so much superior to our own ."
" Watched us out of the house !"
We are all very well pleased , however , for though it is not equal to her marrying Captain Wentworth , it is infinitely better than Charles Hayter ; and Mr Musgrove has written his consent , and Captain Benwick is expected to - day .
And it is so cheerful a place , that it could not fail of being of use to Mr . Woodhouse ' s spirits , which , I understand , are sometimes much depressed .
Edward remained a week at the cottage ; he was earnestly pressed by Mrs . Dashwood to stay longer ; but , as if he were bent only on self - mortification , he seemed resolved to be gone when his enjoyment among his friends was at the height .
But at the same time , she could not help thinking that no one could so well perform it as himself .
" My dear Miss Woodhouse ," said the latter , " I am just run across to entreat the favour of you to come and sit down with us a little while , and give us your opinion of our new instrument ; you and Miss Smith .
Mrs Musgrove had got Mrs Harville ' s children away as much as she could , every possible supply from Uppercross had been furnished , to lighten the inconvenience to the Harvilles , while the Harvilles had been wanting them to come to dinner every day ; and in short , it seemed to have been only a struggle on each side as to which should be most disinterested and hospitable .
" It is enough ," said she ; " to say that he is unlike Fanny is enough .
Their being her relations too made it so much the worse ; and Mrs . Jennings ' s attempts at consolation were therefore unfortunately founded , when she advised her daughter not to care about their being so fashionable ; because they were all cousins and must put up with one another .
I have always understood they were not a happy couple .
Little did Mr . Willoughby imagine , I suppose , when his looks censured me for incivility in breaking up the party , that I was called away to the relief of one whom he had made poor and miserable ; but HAD he known it , what would it have availed ?
What !
As Mrs . Weston observed , " all young people would have their little whims ."
Gone to Mr . Woodhouse ' s .
She could determine nothing at present .
Do not distress her ."
She must see more of him to understand his ways ; at present she only felt they were agreeable .
" And do you not think it more likely that she should leave it to her daughters , than to us ?"
There was instant pleasure in the sight of them , and still greater pleasure was conveyed in sound -- for Mr . Weston immediately accosted her with ,
" I could manage them very well , if it were not for Mary ' s interference ," was what Anne often heard him say , and had a good deal of faith in ; but when listening in turn to Mary ' s reproach of " Charles spoils the children so that I cannot get them into any order ," she never had the smallest temptation to say , " Very true ."
Mr . Elton ' s situation was most suitable , quite the gentleman himself , and without low connexions ; at the same time , not of any family that could fairly object to the doubtful birth of Harriet .
In a few minutes they could distinguish him to be a gentleman ; and in a moment afterwards Marianne rapturously exclaimed ,
one can think of nothing else ."
There seems to me a very decided difference .
She was very far from wishing to dwell on her own feelings , or to represent herself as suffering much , any otherwise than as the self - command she had practised since her first knowledge of Edward ' s engagement , might suggest a hint of what was practicable to Marianne .
" You get upon delicate subjects , Emma ," said Mrs . Weston smiling ; " remember that I am here .-- Mr .
She would not even admit it to have been natural ; and Elinor left her to be convinced that it was so , by that which only could convince her , a better knowledge of mankind .
He shared it , however , in a silence even greater than her own .
Mrs . Elton was very much disappointed .
Lady Middleton seemed to be roused to enjoyment only by the entrance of her four noisy children after dinner , who pulled her about , tore her clothes , and put an end to every kind of discourse except what related to themselves .
" Has he so !-- Then I know nothing of Mr . Elton .
" There is one thing , Emma , which a man can always do , if he chuses , and that is , his duty ; not by manoeuvring and finessing , but by vigour and resolution .
This paragraph was of some importance to the prospects and conduct of Edward .
Such kindness as fell to the share of nobody but me !-- No pride , no hauteur , and your sister just the same -- all sweetness and affability !"
" I never saw any gentleman ' s handwriting "-- Emma began , looking also at Mrs . Weston ; but stopped , on perceiving that Mrs . Weston was attending to some one else -- and the pause gave her time to reflect , " Now , how am I going to introduce him ?-- Am I unequal to speaking his name at once before all these people ?
Every thing that the most zealous affection , the most solicitous care could do to render her comfortable , was the office of each watchful companion , and each found their reward in her bodily ease , and her calmness of spirits .
impossible !"
I sent no answer to Marianne , intending by that to preserve myself from her farther notice ; and for some time I was even determined not to call in Berkeley Street ;-- but at last , judging it wiser to affect the air of a cool , common acquaintance than anything else , I watched you all safely out of the house one morning , and left my name ."
> From you , from my home , I shall never again have the smallest incitement to move ; and if I do mix in other society , it will be only to shew that my spirit is humbled , my heart amended , and that I can practise the civilities , the lesser duties of life , with gentleness and forbearance .
Apologies for her seemingly ungracious silence in their first reception , and the warmest expressions of the gratitude she was always feeling towards herself and Mr . Weston , must necessarily open the cause ; but when these effusions were put by , they had talked a good deal of the present and of the future state of the engagement .
She began immediately to determine , that Edward who lived with his mother , must be asked as his mother was , to a party given by his sister ; and to see him for the first time , after all that passed , in the company of Lucy !-- she hardly knew how she could bear it !
" Nothing at all .
He shook his head .
He came in with eagerness , appeared to see and think only of her , apologised for his stay , was grieved to have kept her waiting , and anxious to get her away without further loss of time and before the rain increased ; and in another moment they walked off together , her arm under his , a gentle and embarrassed glance , and a " Good morning to you !"
" I suppose you will go and stay with your brother and sister , Miss Dashwood , when they come to town ," said Lucy , returning , after a cessation of hostile hints , to the charge .
Proportions , fore - shortening .-- Oh no !
He was reckoned very handsome ; his person much admired in general , though not by her , there being a want of elegance of feature which she could not dispense with :-- but the girl who could be gratified by a Robert Martin ' s riding about the country to get walnuts for her might very well be conquered by Mr . Elton ' s admiration .
Frank ' s was the first idea ; and his the greatest zeal in pursuing it ; for the lady was the best judge of the difficulties , and the most solicitous for accommodation and appearance .
I hoped I was perfectly equal to any sacrifice of that description .
" To be sure it is ; and , indeed , it strikes me that they can want no addition at all .
I have business there ; from thence to town in a day or two .
She vowed at first she would never trim me up a new bonnet , nor do any thing else for me again , so long as she lived ; but now she is quite come to , and we are as good friends as ever .
The idea of her being indebted to Mrs . Elton for what was called an _introduction_ -- of her going into public under the auspices of a friend of Mrs . Elton ' s -- probably some vulgar , dashing widow , who , with the help of a boarder , just made a shift to live !-- The dignity of Miss Woodhouse , of Hartfield , was sunk indeed !
She thought it in reality a sad exchange for herself , to have him with his grave looks and reluctant conversation opposed to her instead of his brother .
Should the result of her observations be unfavourable , she was determined at all events to open the eyes of her sister ; should it be otherwise , her exertions would be of a different nature -- she must then learn to avoid every selfish comparison , and banish every regret which might lessen her satisfaction in the happiness of Marianne .
It made him so very unhappy , indeed , that it could not be persevered in .
At the end of another day or two , Marianne growing visibly stronger every twelve hours , Mrs . Dashwood , urged equally by her own and her daughter ' s wishes , began to talk of removing to Barton .
and after a moment ' s pause , " but you have never asked me one word about our dinner at the Pooles yesterday ."
He was giving orders for a toothpick - case for himself , and till its size , shape , and ornaments were determined , all of which , after examining and debating for a quarter of an hour over every toothpick - case in the shop , were finally arranged by his own inventive fancy , he had no leisure to bestow any other attention on the two ladies , than what was comprised in three or four very broad stares ; a kind of notice which served to imprint on Elinor the remembrance of a person and face , of strong , natural , sterling insignificance , though adorned in the first style of fashion .
Her sister , however , still sanguine , was willing to attribute the change to nothing more than the fatigue of having sat up to have her bed made ; and carefully administering the cordials prescribed , saw her , with satisfaction , sink at last into a slumber , from which she expected the most beneficial effects .
Mrs . Jennings and Mrs . Palmer joined their entreaties , all seemed equally anxious to avoid a family party ; and the young ladies were obliged to yield .
papa , we have missed seeing them but one entire day since they married .
And then whispering -- " Our companions are excessively stupid .
How could you be so unfeeling to Miss Bates ?
Altogether she was quite convinced of Harriet Smith ' s being exactly the young friend she wanted -- exactly the something which her home required .
Had he been in a situation to act independently and marry immediately , it might have been odd that he should leave us without acknowledging everything to me at once : but this is not the case .
It was rather too late in the day to set about being simple - minded and ignorant ; but she left her with every previous resolution confirmed of being humble and discreet , and repressing imagination all the rest of her life .
But this , from the momentary perverseness of impatient suffering , she at first refused to do .
Here is complete proof ."
" Did he indeed ?"
Elinor said no more .
She had sought him .
Donwell Lane is never dusty , and now it is perfectly dry .
His father only called him a coxcomb , and thought it a very good story ; but that Mrs . Weston did not like it , was clear enough , by her passing it over as quickly as possible , and making no other comment than that " all young people would have their little whims ."
Mrs . Elton began to think she had been wrong in disclaiming so warmly .
Your exclamation is very natural ."
I believe you did not hear me telling the others in the drawing - room that we are expecting Frank .
It was most convenient to Emma not to make a direct reply to this assertion ; she chose rather to take up her own line of the subject again .
Another pause ensued ; Marianne was greatly agitated , and it ended thus .
Where did you hear it ?"
I can understand .
I really could not help exclaiming !
Do take it to your sister ."
I declare , Anne , he never talks of you at all ."
" But it is proved by the smallness of the school , which I have heard you speak of , as under the patronage of your sister and Mrs . Bragge ; the only school , and not more than five - and - twenty children ."
" Oh no !
" You mean to return a favourable answer , I collect ."
Their arrival seemed to afford him real satisfaction , and their comfort to be an object of real solicitude to him .
And when he was gone , she almost quarrelled with me -- No , I should not say quarrelled , for we never had a quarrel in our lives ; but she was quite distressed that I had owned the apples were so nearly gone ; she wished I had made him believe we had a great many left .
Either bathing has been of the greatest service to her , or else it is to be attributed to an excellent embrocation of Mr . Wingfield ' s , which we have been applying at times ever since August ."
When my mother removes into another house my services shall be readily given to accommodate her as far as I can .
What Edward felt , as he could not say it himself , it cannot be expected that any one else should say for him .
I honestly said as much to Mr . E . when he was speaking of my future home , and expressing his fears lest the retirement of it should be disagreeable ; and the inferiority of the house too -- knowing what I had been accustomed to -- of course he was not wholly without apprehension .
He makes a monstrous deal of money , and they keep their own coach .
Elinor confirmed it .
They came also for a stroll till breakfast was likely to be ready ; but Louisa recollecting , immediately afterwards that she had something to procure at a shop , invited them all to go back with her into the town .
It would be too much to expect Sir Walter to descend into a small house in his own neighbourhood .
You know I candidly told you I should form my own opinion ; and I am happy to say that I am extremely pleased with him .-- You may believe me .
Elinor set him right as to its situation ; and it seemed rather surprising to him that anybody could live in Devonshire , without living near Dawlish .
" Dating from three o ' clock yesterday .
He was brilliant , he was headstrong .
" Not quite so miserable as to be insensible to mirth .
" Oh !
She hates whist I know ; but is there no round game she cares for ?"
Emma found it really time to be at home ; the visit had already lasted long ; and on examining watches , so much of the morning was perceived to be gone , that Mrs . Weston and her companion taking leave also , could allow themselves only to walk with the two young ladies to Hartfield gates , before they set off for Randalls .
Your sister need not have any scruple even of visiting HER , which , to say the truth , has been a little the case , and very naturally ; for we only knew that Mrs . Jennings was the widow of a man who had got all his money in a low way ; and Fanny and Mrs . Ferrars were both strongly prepossessed , that neither she nor her daughters were such kind of women as Fanny would like to associate with .
" I do not understand you ," replied he , colouring .
Her heart was not so much at ease , nor her satisfaction in their amusements so pure .
" And if you find them troublesome , you must send them home again ."
" That is true ," cried Marianne , in a cheerful voice , and walking to the window as she spoke , to examine the day .
Where _I_ sit is of no consequence .
My father certainly could mean nothing more by his request to me than what you say .
In one moment her imagination placed before her a letter from Willoughby , full of tenderness and contrition , explanatory of all that had passed , satisfactory , convincing ; and instantly followed by Willoughby himself , rushing eagerly into the room to inforce , at her feet , by the eloquence of his eyes , the assurances of his letter .
Emma listened , and then coolly said , " I shall not be satisfied , unless he comes ."
She felt a great deal of good - will towards him .
When people come into a beautiful country of this sort , you know , Miss Woodhouse , one naturally wishes them to see as much as possible ; and Mr . Suckling is extremely fond of exploring .
Where could you expect a more gentlemanlike , agreeable man ?
At Lyme , he had received lessons of more than one sort .
She got up with a headache , was unable to talk , and unwilling to take any nourishment ; giving pain every moment to her mother and sisters , and forbidding all attempt at consolation from either .
A few months hence , and the room now so deserted , occupied but by her silent , pensive self , might be filled again with all that was happy and gay , all that was glowing and bright in prosperous love , all that was most unlike Anne Elliot !
CHAPTER 9
" Time , my dearest Emma , time will heal the wound .-- Your own excellent sense -- your exertions for your father ' s sake -- I know you will not allow yourself --."
He would feel himself in the right ; and the declaration -- made , of course , as a man of sense would make it , in a proper manner -- would do him more good , raise him higher , fix his interest stronger with the people he depended on , than all that a line of shifts and expedients can ever do .
It was evident that the report concerning her had spread , and a short pause succeeded , which seemed to ensure that it would now spread farther .
Now you are to understand , that time had worked a very material change in Mr Elliot ' s opinions as to the value of a baronetcy .
" He has only two thousand pounds of his own ; it would be madness to marry upon that , though for my own part , I could give up every prospect of more without a sigh .
" It is a most repulsive quality , indeed ," said he .
I wish I COULD get him a living , with all my heart .-- She calls me dear Mrs . Jennings , you see .
" What is the gentleman ' s name ?"
Her income was not her own , she said , with such perpetual claims on it ; and it was the more unkind in my father , because , otherwise , the money would have been entirely at my mother ' s disposal , without any restriction whatever .
" Ah !
Good morning to you , my dear sir .
I can allow for the fears of the child , but not of the man .
Oh !
Lady Middleton was equally pleased with Mrs . Dashwood .
Pray , when are they to be married ?"
She and the children might stay very well ."
But does it follow that had he married you , he would have been happy ?-- The inconveniences would have been different .
Elinor joyfully treasured her words as she answered ,
After such behaviour , as I have witnessed during the last month , to Miss Smith -- such attentions as I have been in the daily habit of observing -- to be addressing me in this manner -- this is an unsteadiness of character , indeed , which I had not supposed possible !
-- Here was a sly glance at Emma .
Reflection had given calmness to her judgment , and sobered her own opinion of Willoughby ' s deserts ;-- she wished , therefore , to declare only the simple truth , and lay open such facts as were really due to his character , without any embellishment of tenderness to lead the fancy astray .
By a most fortunate chance his leaving Highbury had been delayed so as to bring him to her assistance at this critical moment .
Like him !
Every body is asleep !"
" You are very wrong , Mr . Willoughby , very blamable ," said Elinor , while her voice , in spite of herself , betrayed her compassionate emotion ; " you ought not to speak in this way , either of Mrs . Willoughby or my sister .
Mr . Weston , on his side , added a virtue to the account which must have some weight .
Anne half smiled and said , " Do you see that in my eye ?"
It might be safely viewed with all its appendages of prosperity and beauty , its rich pastures , spreading flocks , orchard in blossom , and light column of smoke ascending .-- She joined them at the wall , and found them more engaged in talking than in looking around .
" I believe it is very true , my dear , indeed ," said Mr . Woodhouse , with a sigh .
He drew , he varnished , he carpentered , he glued ; he made toys for the children ; he fashioned new netting - needles and pins with improvements ; and if everything else was done , sat down to his large fishing - net at one corner of the room .
Captain Wentworth was come to Kellynch as to a home , to stay as long as he liked , being as thoroughly the object of the Admiral ' s fraternal kindness as of his wife ' s .
She is staying here on a visit to her grandmama and aunt , very worthy people ; I have known them all my life .
yes ; we are always forced to be acquainted whenever she comes to Highbury .
In her letters I shall be at dear Highbury again ."
The Miss Steeles , as she expected , had now all the benefit of these jokes , and in the eldest of them they raised a curiosity to know the name of the gentleman alluded to , which , though often impertinently expressed , was perfectly of a piece with her general inquisitiveness into the concerns of their family .
He spoke and looked so much in earnest , that Anne was not surprised to see Mrs Clay stealing a glance at Elizabeth and herself .
So here he is to go away and enjoy himself , and because I am the poor mother , I am not to be allowed to stir ; and yet , I am sure , I am more unfit than anybody else to be about the child .
" News !
They were sick with horror , while he examined ; but he was not hopeless .
" No ," admitted Charles , " I do not know that he ever does , in a general way ; but however , it is a very clear thing that he admires you exceedingly .
If it will be any satisfaction to you , however , to be told , that I believe his character to be in other respects irreproachable , I am ready to confess it .
Mrs . Elton was spoken of .
" Pray take care , Mrs . Weston , there is a step at the turning .
It was the scrape which he had drawn her into on Harriet ' s account , that gave the deepest hue to his offence .-- Poor Harriet !
CHAPTER 1
" You are right , Mrs . Weston ," said Mr . Knightley warmly , " Miss Fairfax is as capable as any of us of forming a just opinion of Mrs . Elton .
He merely meant to persuade her to give up the engagement ; and as there could be nothing to overcome but the affection of both , he naturally expected that one or two interviews would settle the matter .
His words were echoed with unspeakable astonishment by all but Elinor , who sat with her head leaning over her work , in a state of such agitation as made her hardly know where she was .
CHAPTER 35
` Not that it was such a very old petticoat either -- for still it would last a great while -- and , indeed , she must thankfully say that their petticoats were all very strong .'"
" I thought you meant to go with me .
Indeed , when the time draws on , I shall decidedly recommend their bringing the barouche - landau ; it will be so very much preferable .
May its approval beam in that soft eye !
Can you fail to have understood my wishes ?
It makes me envious and miserable ;-- I who have never seen it !
I have passed a wretched night in endeavouring to excuse a conduct which can scarcely be called less than insulting ; but though I have not yet been able to form any reasonable apology for your behaviour , I am perfectly ready to hear your justification of it .
Mrs . Weston had been speaking to her at the same moment .
Nobody is more liked than Mr . Willoughby wherever he goes , and so you may tell your sister .
Emma spoke with a very proper degree of pleasure ; and fully assented to his proposition of Mr . Frank Churchill and Miss Smith making their party quite complete .
How do you do ?-- Very well , I thank you .
There was hardly time to talk over the first letter from Enscombe before " Mr . Elton and his bride " was in every body ' s mouth , and Frank Churchill was forgotten .
We never see any thing of it on our club - nights ."
Do you imagine Colonel Campbell knows the business to be going forward just at this time ?-- Do you imagine it to be the consequence of an immediate commission from him , or that he may have sent only a general direction , an order indefinite as to time , to depend upon contingencies and conveniences ?"
It suits us very well .
Oh !-- you need not be afraid of owning it to me , for Mr . Weston has told me himself .
Emma continued to entertain no doubt of her being in love .
" Did you go then ?
Elton !-- The stain of illegitimacy , unbleached by nobility or wealth , would have been a stain indeed .
We cannot help ourselves .
My blindness to what was going on , led me to act by them in a way that I must always be ashamed of , and I was very foolishly tempted to say and do many things which may well lay me open to unpleasant conjectures , but I have no other reason to regret that I was not in the secret earlier ."
So much the better .
But I have done with expecting any course of steady reading from Emma .
Frederick !
Hope had already entered ; and feeling all its anxious flutter , she bent over her sister to watch -- she hardly knew for what .
In what respect ?
" I do not wonder , Miss Woodhouse ," she resumed , " that you should feel a great difference between the two , as to me or as to any body .
Then turning to Mrs . Weston , with a look of gentle reproach --" Ah !
said he , ` I can fasten the rivet .
She is poor ; she has sunk from the comforts she was born to ; and , if she live to old age , must probably sink more .
The grounds of Hartfield were small , but neat and pretty ; and the house was modern and well - built .
Emma Woodhouse , handsome , clever , and rich , with a comfortable home and happy disposition , seemed to unite some of the best blessings of existence ; and had lived nearly twenty - one years in the world with very little to distress or vex her .
Lucky fellow to get her !
Half the sum of attraction , on either side , might have been enough , for he had nothing to do , and she had hardly anybody to love ; but the encounter of such lavish recommendations could not fail .
An abominable puppy !-- You know who I mean ( nodding to her husband ).
She was a very pretty girl , and her beauty happened to be of a sort which Emma particularly admired .
Here and there , human nature may be great in times of trial ; but generally speaking , it is its weakness and not its strength that appears in a sick chamber : it is selfishness and impatience rather than generosity and fortitude , that one hears of .
Had she been using any thing in particular ?"
But though so much of the matter was known to them already , that Mrs . Jennings might have had enough to do in spreading that knowledge farther , without seeking after more , she had resolved from the first to pay a visit of comfort and inquiry to her cousins as soon as she could ; and nothing but the hindrance of more visitors than usual , had prevented her going to them within that time .
CHAPTER 46
Mrs Harville was a very experienced nurse , and her nursery - maid , who had lived with her long , and gone about with her everywhere , was just such another .
" Cleveland !"
It was well that he took every body ' s joy for granted , or he might not have thought either Mr . Woodhouse or Mr . Knightley particularly delighted .
" He did not know what he was talking of , I dare say ; ten to one but he was light - headed at the time .
But my mother , my dearest , kindest mother ,-- I feel the justice of what Elinor has urged , and if she were to be made less happy , less comfortable by our absence -- Oh !
I value not her censure any more than I should do her commendation .
His declining to be on cordial terms with the head of his family , has left a very strong impression in his disfavour with me ."
" No .-- He thinks Marianne ' s affection too deeply rooted for any change in it under a great length of time , and even supposing her heart again free , is too diffident of himself to believe , that with such a difference of age and disposition he could ever attach her .
Mr . Knightley was a sort of general friend and adviser , and she knew Mr . Elton looked up to him .
Delighted to hear it indeed .
South End is an unhealthy place .
" Perhaps it is to tell you that your cousin Fanny is married ?"
He has too much real feeling to address any woman on the haphazard of selfish passion .
I could hardly keep my seat .
It was not likely , however , that any body should have equalled her in the date of the plan , as it had entered her brain during the very first evening of Harriet ' s coming to Hartfield .
" He will have every body ' s wishes for his happiness ."
I should have visited Admiral Croft , however , at any rate .
She would have been too happy but for poor Harriet ; but every blessing of her own seemed to involve and advance the sufferings of her friend , who must now be even excluded from Hartfield .
Charles Hayter seemed aware of being slighted , and yet Henrietta had sometimes the air of being divided between them .
" Nonsense , errant nonsense , as ever was talked !"
" He has been wanting to come to us ," continued Mr . Weston , " ever since September : every letter has been full of it ; but he cannot command his own time .
" Sir ," said Mr . Woodhouse , rather warmly , " you are very much mistaken if you suppose Mr . Perry to be that sort of character .
Elinor honoured her for a plan which originated so nobly as this ; though smiling to see the same eager fancy which had been leading her to the extreme of languid indolence and selfish repining , now at work in introducing excess into a scheme of such rational employment and virtuous self - control .
Emma watched the entree of her own particular little friend ; and if she could not exult in her dignity and grace , she could not only love the blooming sweetness and the artless manner , but could most heartily rejoice in that light , cheerful , unsentimental disposition which allowed her so many alleviations of pleasure , in the midst of the pangs of disappointed affection .
Good bye ."
Part only of this answer , however , was admitted .
This is a point which you must settle with your feelings ."
" There now ; you see how droll he is .
Nothing new was heard by them , for a day or two afterwards , of affairs in Harley Street , or Bartlett ' s Buildings .
But I live out of the world , and am often astonished at what I hear .
" Oh , la !
The first part of their journey was performed in too melancholy a disposition to be otherwise than tedious and unpleasant .
In that case , nothing could be more pitiable or more honourable than the sacrifices she had resolved on .
I clearly understand it now , and I will strictly fulfil my engagement by such acts of assistance and kindness to them as you have described .
" More air than one often sees in Bath .
Mrs . Smith has this morning exercised the privilege of riches upon a poor dependent cousin , by sending me on business to London .
She has borne it all , with the fortitude of an angel !
They did not like each other , and no renewal of acquaintance now could do any good ; and were Lady Russell to see them together , she might think that he had too much self - possession , and she too little .
He could do nothing till he were assured of his fate with Miss Dashwood ; and by his rapidity in seeking THAT fate , it is to be supposed , in spite of the jealousy with which he had once thought of Colonel Brandon , in spite of the modesty with which he rated his own deserts , and the politeness with which he talked of his doubts , he did not , upon the whole , expect a very cruel reception .
There was always such a great connexion between the Dalrymples and ourselves .
She had soon afterwards reason to believe that the beginning was already made , and could not but hope that the gipsy , though she had _told_ no fortune , might be proved to have made Harriet ' s .-- About a fortnight after the alarm , they came to a sufficient explanation , and quite undesignedly .
replied Mrs . Weston , smiling , " what is the certainty of caprice ?"
The Palmers returned to Cleveland the next day , and the two families at Barton were again left to entertain each other .
Anne , must not it be our Mr Elliot ?
The preferment , which only two days before she had considered as hopeless for Edward , was already provided to enable him to marry ;-- and SHE , of all people in the world , was fixed on to bestow it !-- Her emotion was such as Mrs . Jennings had attributed to a very different cause ;-- but whatever minor feelings less pure , less pleasing , might have a share in that emotion , her esteem for the general benevolence , and her gratitude for the particular friendship , which together prompted Colonel Brandon to this act , were strongly felt , and warmly expressed .
It used to stand here .
" Colonel Brandon is so delicate a man , that he rather wished any one to announce his intentions to Mr . Ferrars than himself ."
" Is not this song worth staying for ?"
cried Marianne with sparkling eyes , " and with elegance , with spirit ?"
She had been at Bath the year before , and Lady Russell had heard her spoken of as a charming woman .
" Aye , aye , that is very pretty talking -- but it won ' t do -- the Doctor is the man , I see ."
I found them most intimate friends ; and I , too , became excessively pleased with Mr Elliot , and entertained the highest opinion of him .
Where shall we see a better daughter , or a kinder sister , or a truer friend ?
" And that you are very likely to do very soon , I can tell you , ma ' am ," said Charles .
" I like your plan ," cried Mr . Weston .
` Elegance , sweetness , beauty .'
He cannot want money -- he cannot want leisure .
Perhaps to Hartfield , perhaps to the Abbey Mill , perhaps into his woods .-- Miss Woodhouse , this is not like our friend Knightley !-- Can you explain it ?"
It was just possible that she might have been persuaded by Lady Russell !
She had not time to know how Mr . Elton took the reproof , so rapidly did another subject succeed ; for Mr . John Knightley now came into the room from examining the weather , and opened on them all with the information of the ground being covered with snow , and of its still snowing fast , with a strong drifting wind ; concluding with these words to Mr . Woodhouse :
" Me !-- not at all ," replied Mr . Knightley , rather displeased ; " I do not want to think ill of him .
" Nobody ever did think well of the Churchills , I fancy ," observed Mr . John Knightley coolly .
An excellent , good - hearted fellow , I assure you ; a very active , zealous officer too , which is more than you would think for , perhaps , for that soft sort of manner does not do him justice ."
Cole was saying the other day she wanted something from Kingston ."
She could not contemplate the change as implying less .
I think we do want a larger council .
" Well , as you are resolved to go , I wish you a good journey .
Their dress was very smart , their manners very civil , they were delighted with the house , and in raptures with the furniture , and they happened to be so doatingly fond of children that Lady Middleton ' s good opinion was engaged in their favour before they had been an hour at the Park .
Considering the very superior claims of the object , it ought ; and judging by its apparently stronger effect on Harriet ' s mind , producing reserve and self - command , it would .-- She must communicate the painful truth , however , and as soon as possible .
" Thank you , thank you .-- This is just what I wanted to be assured of .-- Oh !
But I thought I would just tell you of this , because I knew how much it must please you .
As yet , you have seen nothing of Bath .
I observed him narrowly , and am convinced of it .
She had never in her life been more astonished .
She had already acknowledged it to herself , and she could not think differently , let him think of her as he would .
It must not be : and yet the danger of a renewal of the acquaintance !--
I am determined against all interference .
Sometimes , indeed , I have thought you were half suspecting me of pleading poor Martin ' s cause , which was never the case ; but , from all my observations , I am convinced of her being an artless , amiable girl , with very good notions , very seriously good principles , and placing her happiness in the affections and utility of domestic life .-- Much of this , I have no doubt , she may thank you for ."
All his sanguine expectations , all his confidence had been justified .
" I must not tell , ma ' am .
Jealousy of Mr Elliot !
But I never heard it spoken of till two days ago ."
He declares he won ' t .
You see we have been wedging one leg with paper .
No husbands and wives ," with so interesting a consciousness , that Emma began to consider whether she had not better leave them together at once .
CHAPTER XIII
I do not understand it .
Her spirits seemed overcome .
" Prejudiced !
Have you forgot , Marianne , how many pleasant days we have owed to them ?"
" And , in return for your acknowledging so much , I will do you the justice to say , that you would have chosen for him better than he has chosen for himself .-- Harriet Smith has some first - rate qualities , which Mrs . Elton is totally without .
no -- I hope I shall not be ridiculous about it .
if you had seen her , as I did , when she was at the worst !"
" It was at Gibraltar , mother , I know .
Mr . Weston is really as kind as herself .
She was the first to announce it to Mr . Knightley ; and exclaimed quite as much as was necessary , ( or , being acting a part , perhaps rather more ,) at the conduct of the Churchills , in keeping him away .
Lady Russell could not help laughing .
Mr . Dashwood had wished for it more for the sake of his wife and daughters than for himself or his son ;-- but to his son , and his son ' s son , a child of four years old , it was secured , in such a way , as to leave to himself no power of providing for those who were most dear to him , and who most needed a provision by any charge on the estate , or by any sale of its valuable woods .
Mrs Harville , her children , and Captain Benwick , remained with Mr Musgrove and Louisa at Uppercross .
" I think you spoke of having known Mr Elliot many years ?"
The enclosure of Norland Common , now carrying on , is a most serious drain .
Indeed you should take care of yourself as well as of your friend .
You saw her with the Campbells , when she was the equal of every body she mixed with , but here she is with a poor old grandmother , who has barely enough to live on .
" What do you mean ?"
Anne could perfectly comprehend the exquisite relief , and was only the more inclined to wonder at the composure of her friend ' s usual state of mind .
Such personal praise might have struck her , especially as it did not appear to Anne that the freckles were at all lessened .
Bless me !
My only doubt is , whether anything could persuade him to leave his parish .
His ideas seemed more moderate -- his feelings warmer .
I suppose it is something he is ashamed of ."
I have a great idea that you do not design to be cruel , when the right moment occurs .
" She taxed me with the offence at once , and my confusion may be guessed .
I warrant you she is a fine size by this time ."
" But I am very much , and without being at all ashamed of it .
I ' m sure there ' s a vast many smart beaux in Exeter ; but you know , how could I tell what smart beaux there might be about Norland ; and I was only afraid the Miss Dashwoods might find it dull at Barton , if they had not so many as they used to have .
But I thought of her , I believe , every moment of the day .
He is to be married very soon -- a good - for - nothing fellow !
could not have supposed any thing !-- Such elegance and profusion !-- I have seen nothing like it since -- Well , where shall we sit ?
and the Doctor is a single man , I warrant you ."
But Mrs . Ferrars is a very headstrong proud woman , and in her first fit of anger upon hearing it , would very likely secure every thing to Robert , and the idea of that , for Edward ' s sake , frightens away all my inclination for hasty measures ."
" That cannot be much to your taste , I know ," said she ; " but I do believe him to be an excellent young man ."
_I_ think seriously of Miss Smith !-- Miss Smith is a very good sort of girl ; and I should be happy to see her respectably settled .
` I did not make the allowances ,' said she , ` which I ought to have done , for his temper and spirits -- his delightful spirits , and that gaiety , that playfulness of disposition , which , under any other circumstances , would , I am sure , have been as constantly bewitching to me , as they were at first .'
This is delightful , is not it ?-- Where ' s dear Mr .
While he talked to Isabella , however , Emma found an opportunity of saying ,
Where I have a regard , I always think a person well - looking .
" Perhaps ," said Mr Elliot , speaking low , " I have had a longer acquaintance with your character than you are aware of ."
" Charles may say what he pleases ," cried Mary to Anne , as soon as he was out of the room , " but it would be shocking to have Henrietta marry Charles Hayter ; a very bad thing for her , and still worse for me ; and therefore it is very much to be wished that Captain Wentworth may soon put him quite out of her head , and I have very little doubt that he has .
The interest he takes in her -- his anxiety about her health -- his concern that she should have no happier prospect !
who can require it ?"
Nothing could be more expressive of attachment to them all , than Willoughby ' s behaviour .
" Not Harriet ' s equal !"
Ah !
But he was now married ; and she condemned her heart for the lurking flattery , which so much heightened the pain of the intelligence .
He always moved with the alertness of a mind which could neither be undecided nor dilatory , but now he seemed more sudden than usual in his disappearance .
Elinor contradicted it , however , very positively ; and by relating that she had herself been employed in conveying the offer from Colonel Brandon to Edward , and , therefore , must understand the terms on which it was given , obliged him to submit to her authority .
Another minute brought another addition .
" You ought to know your friend best ," replied Mr . Knightley ; " but I should say she was a good - tempered , soft - hearted girl , not likely to be very , very determined against any young man who told her he loved her ."
I was sure it could not be far off ; but I had put my huswife upon it , you see , without being aware , and so it was quite hid , but I had it in my hand so very lately that I was almost sure it must be on the table .
Because he believes many people pretend to more admiration of the beauties of nature than they really feel , and is disgusted with such pretensions , he affects greater indifference and less discrimination in viewing them himself than he possesses .
it is over !"
Yet , in spite of all this , Anne had reason to believe that she had moments only of languor and depression , to hours of occupation and enjoyment .
Will you come and spend some time at Cleveland this Christmas ?
She had never been quite well since the time of their daughter ' s marriage ; and till she should have completely recovered her usual strength , they must forbid her engaging in duties , which , so far from being compatible with a weakened frame and varying spirits , seemed , under the most favourable circumstances , to require something more than human perfection of body and mind to be discharged with tolerable comfort .
" Certainly ; you must be sensible that the last half - year has made a great difference in your way of life ."
She was pretty too -- at least I thought so THEN ; and I had seen so little of other women , that I could make no comparisons , and see no defects .
" Really ," said Elinor , " I know so little of these kind of forms , that I can hardly even conjecture as to the time , or the preparation necessary ; but I suppose two or three months will complete his ordination ."
It was her own choice to give the time of their absence to Highbury ; to spend , perhaps , her last months of perfect liberty with those kind relations to whom she was so very dear : and the Campbells , whatever might be their motive or motives , whether single , or double , or treble , gave the arrangement their ready sanction , and said , that they depended more on a few months spent in her native air , for the recovery of her health , than on any thing else .
" By the bye -- I have not wished you joy .
When Harriet had closed her evidence , she appealed to her dear Miss Woodhouse , to say whether she had not good ground for hope .
" If you were never particularly struck by her manners before ," said she , " I think you will to - day .
They went back to dress and dine ; and so well had the scheme answered already , that nothing was found amiss ; though its being " so entirely out of season ," and the " no thoroughfare of Lyme ," and the " no expectation of company ," had brought many apologies from the heads of the inn .
WINDSOR - JULY .
I did invite him , you know .
And as it is some months since Miss Campbell married , the impression may be a little worn off ."
I am afraid his circumstances may be bad .
This card - room would be wanted as a card - room now ; or , if cards were conveniently voted unnecessary by their four selves , still was it not too small for any comfortable supper ?
Mrs . Goddard was the mistress of a School -- not of a seminary , or an establishment , or any thing which professed , in long sentences of refined nonsense , to combine liberal acquirements with elegant morality , upon new principles and new systems -- and where young ladies for enormous pay might be screwed out of health and into vanity -- but a real , honest , old - fashioned Boarding - school , where a reasonable quantity of accomplishments were sold at a reasonable price , and where girls might be sent to be out of the way , and scramble themselves into a little education , without any danger of coming back prodigies .
After dinner she would try her piano - forte .
" I suspect ," said Elinor , " that to avoid one kind of affectation , Edward here falls into another .
How trifling they make every thing else appear !-- I feel now as if I could think of nothing but these poor creatures all the rest of the day ; and yet , who can say how soon it may all vanish from my mind ?"
" He is very obliging ," said Emma ; " but is he sure that Harriet means to marry him ?"
He was a married man , with only one living child , a girl , about Jane ' s age : and Jane became their guest , paying them long visits and growing a favourite with all ; and before she was nine years old , his daughter ' s great fondness for her , and his own wish of being a real friend , united to produce an offer from Colonel Campbell of undertaking the whole charge of her education .
is it you ?
Mrs . Jennings , with a thoroughly good - humoured concern for its cause , admitted the excuse most readily , and Elinor , after seeing her safe off , returned to Marianne , whom she found attempting to rise from the bed , and whom she reached just in time to prevent her from falling on the floor , faint and giddy from a long want of proper rest and food ; for it was many days since she had any appetite , and many nights since she had really slept ; and now , when her mind was no longer supported by the fever of suspense , the consequence of all this was felt in an aching head , a weakened stomach , and a general nervous faintness .
Anne could listen no longer ; she could not even have told how the poor Admiral ' s complexion escaped ; her letter engrossed her .
" You cannot do better , sir ."
I meant only myself .
He could not believe her to be encouraging him .
She is nothing to me , compared with you ;" and she was in full time to hear her father say , " My dear madam , this must not be .
While they were thus comfortably occupied , Mr . Woodhouse was enjoying a full flow of happy regrets and fearful affection with his daughter .
It was misery to think of Mr Elliot ' s attentions .
" It is odd though ," observed his father , " that you should have had such a regular connected dream about people whom it was not very likely you should be thinking of at Enscombe .
The advantages of Bath to the young are pretty generally understood .
If you CAN pity me , Miss Dashwood , pity my situation as it was THEN .
He always speaks to the purpose ; open , straightforward , and very well judging .
Sixteen years had Miss Taylor been in Mr . Woodhouse ' s family , less as a governess than a friend , very fond of both daughters , but particularly of Emma .
Edward seemed a second Willoughby ; and acknowledging as Elinor did , that she HAD loved him most sincerely , could she feel less than herself !
She had previously determined how far she would proceed , on any application of the sort ; and it would be safer for both , to have the judicious law of her own brain laid down with speed .-- She was decided , and thus spoke --
One consolation however remained for them , to which the exigence of the moment gave more than usual propriety ; it was that of running with all possible speed down the steep side of the hill which led immediately to their garden gate .
" Yes --( rather hesitatingly )-- I believe I do ."
Emma felt that she could not do better than go home directly .
Mrs . Weston was very ready to say how attentive and pleasant a companion he made himself -- how much she saw to like in his disposition altogether .
The rooms were shut up , the lodgers almost all gone , scarcely any family but of the residents left ; and , as there is nothing to admire in the buildings themselves , the remarkable situation of the town , the principal street almost hurrying into the water , the walk to the Cobb , skirting round the pleasant little bay , which , in the season , is animated with bathing machines and company ; the Cobb itself , its old wonders and new improvements , with the very beautiful line of cliffs stretching out to the east of the town , are what the stranger ' s eye will seek ; and a very strange stranger it must be , who does not see charms in the immediate environs of Lyme , to make him wish to know it better .
She recalled her past kindness -- the kindness , the affection of sixteen years -- how she had taught and how she had played with her from five years old -- how she had devoted all her powers to attach and amuse her in health -- and how nursed her through the various illnesses of childhood .
In about half an hour her mother returned , and though her eyes were red , her countenance was not uncheerful .
" Me , my love ," cried his wife , hearing and understanding only in part .-- " Are you talking about me ?-- I am sure nobody ought to be , or can be , a greater advocate for matrimony than I am ; and if it had not been for the misery of her leaving Hartfield , I should never have thought of Miss Taylor but as the most fortunate woman in the world ; and as to slighting Mr . Weston , that excellent Mr . Weston , I think there is nothing he does not deserve .
" Oh , don ' t think of me !"
When she took in her history , indeed , her situation , as well as her beauty ; when she considered what all this elegance was destined to , what she was going to sink from , how she was going to live , it seemed impossible to feel any thing but compassion and respect ; especially , if to every well - known particular entitling her to interest , were added the highly probable circumstance of an attachment to Mr . Dixon , which she had so naturally started to herself .
Mr . Knightley , why do not you stay at home like poor Mr .
The young man ' s conduct , and his sister ' s , seemed the result of real feeling , and she could not but pity them .
She was persuaded by Lady Russell ' s countenance that she had seen him .
I shall go abroad for a couple of years -- and when I return , I shall come to you for my wife .
A sick child is always the mother ' s property : her own feelings generally make it so ."
His attachment to them all increased .
I never shall forget his manner .
" I was not quite impartial in my judgment , Emma :-- but yet , I think -- had _you_ not been in the case -- I should still have distrusted him ."
Miss Smith , pray take care .
Good gracious !
But now , she would rather it had not happened .
I told him the distance and the road , and I told him of the church ' s being so very well worth seeing ; for as he has a taste for those sort of things , I thought that would be a good excuse , and he listened with all his understanding and soul ; and I am sure from his manner that you will have him calling here soon .
turning away distressed .
The work of one moment was destroyed by the next .
How inconsiderate , how indelicate , how irrational , how unfeeling had been her conduct !
Elinor is well , you see .
" It comes to the same thing .
An excellent thought of yours , indeed , Anne .
She stopt to blush and laugh at her own relapse , and then resumed a more serious , more dispiriting cogitation upon what had been , and might be , and must be .
Mrs . Weston and Emma were sitting together on a sofa .
" But you must have found it very damp and dirty .
It was perfectly accordant with that resolution of character which I knew her to possess ; and the secrecy she had maintained , as to any such design in her former letter , was equally descriptive of its anxious delicacy .
And no apology left , no message for me .
Louisa certainly put more forward for his notice than her sister .
" My love , have you been asleep ?"
Take a box for to - morrow night !
It only added a dangerous character to himself .
Nay , he appeared so much otherwise , that his daughter ' s courage failed .
Mrs . Ferrars is one of the most affectionate mothers in the world ."
And again , on Emma ' s merely turning her head to look at Mrs . Bates ' s knitting , she added , in a half whisper ,
While he was not obliged to say that he believed her to have been right in originally dividing them , he was ready to say almost everything else in her favour , and as for Mrs Smith , she had claims of various kinds to recommend her quickly and permanently .
He entered the room with a look of self - consequence , slightly bowed to the ladies , without speaking a word , and , after briefly surveying them and their apartments , took up a newspaper from the table , and continued to read it as long as he staid .
Every letter from her is read forty times over ; her compliments to all friends go round and round again ; and if she does but send her aunt the pattern of a stomacher , or knit a pair of garters for her grandmother , one hears of nothing else for a month .
A private dance , without sitting down to supper , was pronounced an infamous fraud upon the rights of men and women ; and Mrs . Weston must not speak of it again .
" Oh -- he did not say much ; but he looked as if he knew it to be true , so from that moment I set it down as certain .
Yes , I immediately perceive that it must be the joint present of Mr . and Mrs . Dixon .
Well , poor thing !
His mother and sisters were very fond of him .
" You will not find either , between Donwell and Highbury .
Concession must be out of the question ; but it was time to appear to forget that they had ever quarrelled ; and she hoped it might rather assist the restoration of friendship , that when he came into the room she had one of the children with her -- the youngest , a nice little girl about eight months old , who was now making her first visit to Hartfield , and very happy to be danced about in her aunt ' s arms .
" Is not she looking well ?"
And woman , lovely woman , reigns alone .
" I am writing home , Marianne ," said Elinor ; " had not you better defer your letter for a day or two ?"
" I have heard him lamenting her having no instrument repeatedly ; oftener than I should suppose such a circumstance would , in the common course of things , occur to him ."
To pacify Mary , and perhaps screen her own embarrassment , Anne did move quietly to the window .
There could be no doubt of his being a sensible man .
He was particularly grave the whole morning .
They encouraged each other now in the violence of their affliction .
I dared not address her openly ; my difficulties in the then state of Enscombe must be too well known to require definition ; and I was fortunate enough to prevail , before we parted at Weymouth , and to induce the most upright female mind in the creation to stoop in charity to a secret engagement .-- Had she refused , I should have gone mad .-- But you will be ready to say , what was your hope in doing this ?-- What did you look forward to ?-- To any thing , every thing -- to time , chance , circumstance , slow effects , sudden bursts , perseverance and weariness , health and sickness .
Lord !
" Oh , Lord !
She longed for the serenity they might gradually introduce ; and on Mr . Perry ' s coming in soon after dinner , with a disengaged hour to give her father , she lost no time ill hurrying into the shrubbery .-- There , with spirits freshened , and thoughts a little relieved , she had taken a few turns , when she saw Mr . Knightley passing through the garden door , and coming towards her .-- It was the first intimation of his being returned from London .
Jane will be treated with such regard and kindness !-- It will be nothing but pleasure , a life of pleasure .-- And her salary !-- I really cannot venture to name her salary to you , Miss Woodhouse .
" I think her all you describe .
Mr . John Knightley here asked Emma quietly whether there were any doubts of the air of Randalls .
In the few minutes ' conversation which she had yet had with him , while Harriet had been partially insensible , he had spoken of her terror , her naivete , her fervour as she seized and clung to his arm , with a sensibility amused and delighted ; and just at last , after Harriet ' s own account had been given , he had expressed his indignation at the abominable folly of Miss Bickerton in the warmest terms .
" Did you ever have your likeness taken , Harriet ?"
I know the danger of indulging such speculations .
I suppose you know he wanted to marry Anne ?"
Emma will be happy to entertain you .
alas !
" Nay , my dear , I ' m sure I don ' t pretend to say that there an ' t .
Marianne turned away in great confusion .
This event , while it raised the spirits of Elinor , restored to those of her sister all , and more than all , their former agitation .
With all the eagerness which such a transition gives , Emma resolved to be out of doors as soon as possible .
She smiled , and said how she had changed her name since she was in these parts .
and she and her partner the happiest !--" I said it would be so ," was the only consolation .
Besides , if she does play so very well , you know , it is no more than she is obliged to do , because she will have to teach .
He perfectly agreed with her : and after walking together so long , and thinking so much alike , Emma felt herself so well acquainted with him , that she could hardly believe it to be only their second meeting .
But that would not do .
He too was much distressed ; and they sat down together in a most promising state of embarrassment .-- Whether he had asked her pardon for his intrusion on first coming into the room , he could not recollect ; but determining to be on the safe side , he made his apology in form as soon as he could say any thing , after taking a chair .
No !-- she was more and more convinced that Mrs . Weston was quite mistaken in that surmise .
I am extremely sorry for it -- for I know him to be a very good - hearted creature ; as well - meaning a fellow perhaps , as any in the world .
" Nothing to the purpose ," replied her brother .
Oh !
There I was quite right .
Mary never wrote to Bath herself ; all the toil of keeping up a slow and unsatisfactory correspondence with Elizabeth fell on Anne .
What he might say on the subject a twelvemonth after , must be referred to the imagination of husbands and wives .
" No -- I shall not stir .
Mrs . Weston wants to see you .
" Yes , you have certainly removed something -- a little .-- You have proved yourself , on the whole , less faulty than I had believed you .
She drew up plans of economy , she made exact calculations , and she did what nobody else thought of doing : she consulted Anne , who never seemed considered by the others as having any interest in the question .
Martin ?"
But on the other hand , as Emma wants to see her better informed , it will be an inducement to her to read more herself .
It was curious , that having just left you behind me in Bath , my first and principal acquaintance on marrying should be your cousin ; and that , through him , I should be continually hearing of your father and sister .
and there was a Mrs Wallis , at present known only to them by description , as she was in daily expectation of her confinement ; but Mr Elliot spoke of her as " a most charming woman , quite worthy of being known in Camden Place ," and as soon as she recovered they were to be acquainted .
The house and grounds , and furniture , were approved , the Crofts were approved , terms , time , every thing , and every body , was right ; and Mr Shepherd ' s clerks were set to work , without there having been a single preliminary difference to modify of all that " This indenture sheweth ."
" I am no match - maker , as you well know ," said Lady Russell , " being much too well aware of the uncertainty of all human events and calculations .
Elinor , rejoiced to be assured of his being in London , now ventured to say , " Depend upon it , he will call again tomorrow ."
" Was there no one else in the carriage ?"
We shall never forget what you did ."
" Then it is settled , Musgrove ," cried Captain Wentworth , " that you stay , and that I take care of your sister home .
Captain Harville , though not equalling Captain Wentworth in manners , was a perfect gentleman , unaffected , warm , and obliging .
Mrs Musgrove and Mrs Hayter were sisters .
No , my dear little modest Harriet , depend upon it the picture will not be in Bond - street till just before he mounts his horse to - morrow .
" Oh !
Her sister was perhaps laid down upon the bed , or in her dressing gown , and therefore not able to come to them .
She , poor soul , is tied by the leg .
" Good heavens !"
" What a precious deposit !"
I know what your drawings are .
The preparations must take their time , nothing could be properly ready till the third week were entered on , and for a few days they must be planning , proceeding and hoping in uncertainty -- at the risk -- in her opinion , the great risk , of its being all in vain .
" I could see it in his face .
" I not aware !"
Sir John Middleton , who called on them every day for the first fortnight , and who was not in the habit of seeing much occupation at home , could not conceal his amazement on finding them always employed .
" Never marry !-- This is a new resolution ."
Mrs . Jennings was so far from being weary of her guest , that she pressed them very earnestly to return with her again from Cleveland .
" We had better not talk about it , my dear ," replied Mrs Croft , pleasantly ; " for if Miss Elliot were to hear how soon we came to an understanding , she would never be persuaded that we could be happy together .
But , whatever might really be its limits , it was enough , when perceived by his sister , to make her uneasy , and at the same time , ( which was still more common ,) to make her uncivil .
Mr . Knightley does nothing mysteriously ."
My line of conduct will be more direct .
said he directly , ` there is nothing in the way of fruit half so good , and these are the finest - looking home - baked apples I ever saw in my life .'
Ours are all apple - tarts .
" Certainly I could have none .
Churchill ?"
I speak as a friend , Emma .
very well ," said Mrs . Jennings rather disappointed .
For my temptation to _think_ it a right , I refer every caviller to a brick house , sashed windows below , and casements above , in Highbury .
" Yes , I have no doubt of her being extremely attached to him ."
When you come to a frigate , of course , you are more confined ; though any reasonable woman may be perfectly happy in one of them ; and I can safely say , that the happiest part of my life has been spent on board a ship .
Mr . Weston was a man of unexceptionable character , easy fortune , suitable age , and pleasant manners ; and there was some satisfaction in considering with what self - denying , generous friendship she had always wished and promoted the match ; but it was a black morning ' s work for her .
Pray make my excuses and adieus to her ."
Elinor , with great civility , declined the proposal .
" Perhaps you think I am come on purpose to quarrel with you , knowing Weston to be out , and that you must still fight your own battle ."
Emma was extremely glad to see him -- but there was a degree of confusion -- a number of embarrassing recollections on each side .
This letter , however , was written , and sealed , and sent .
Sighs and fine words had been given in abundance ; but she could hardly devise any set of expressions , or fancy any tone of voice , less allied with real love .
He did not come however .
Again he stopped to recover himself ; and Elinor spoke her feelings in an exclamation of tender concern , at the fate of his unfortunate friend .
Her spirits sank .
Do you think it is a good one ?
This is quite the season indeed for friendly meetings .
" Yet you wrote to him ?"
I thought it must be so .
How so ?
I rather believe you are giving me more credit for acuteness than I deserve .
said Emma , highly amused .--" Mr .
I was glad you made her play so much , for having no instrument at her grandmother ' s , it must have been a real indulgence ."
He might be superseded by another ; he certainly would indeed ; nothing could be clearer ; even a Robert Martin would have been sufficient ; but nothing else , she feared , would cure her .
For a short time he sat deep in thought , after Elinor had ceased to speak ;-- at last , and as if it were rather an effort , he said ,
poor Jane is ill !'
Oh !
Mr . Knightley , in fact , was one of the few people who could see faults in Emma Woodhouse , and the only one who ever told her of them : and though this was not particularly agreeable to Emma herself , she knew it would be so much less so to her father , that she would not have him really suspect such a circumstance as her not being thought perfect by every body .
She thinks nobody equal to him ."
She could never see a fault in any of them .
You pierce my soul .
" It is a great relief to me -- what Elinor told me this morning -- I have now heard exactly what I wished to hear ."
how fond he was of it !
It darted through her , with the speed of an arrow , that Mr . Knightley must marry no one but herself !
She was not sorry for the excuse .
It was a reference to the future , which Anne , after a little observation , felt she must submit to .
Her voice sunk with the word , but presently reviving she added ,
She tried to explain the real state of the case to her sister .
Emma demurred .
How completely it meant , ` why should my picture be drawn ?'"
" But Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax !"
There , he had learnt to distinguish between the steadiness of principle and the obstinacy of self - will , between the darings of heedlessness and the resolution of a collected mind .
How to have this anxious business set to rights , and be admitted as cousins again , was the question : and it was a question which , in a more rational manner , neither Lady Russell nor Mr Elliot thought unimportant .
" What an excellent device ," said he , " the use of a sheepskin for carriages .
And as to its recommendations to _you_ , I fancy I need not take much pains to dwell on them .
" Emma never thinks of herself , if she can do good to others ," rejoined Mr . Woodhouse , understanding but in part .
If he were quite sincere , if he really tried to come , it was to be inferred that Mrs . Churchill ' s removal to London had been of no service to the wilful or nervous part of her disorder .
" I am going to Kingston .
My partiality does not blind me ; he certainly is not so handsome as Willoughby -- but at the same time , there is something much more pleasing in his countenance .-- There was always a something ,-- if you remember ,-- in Willoughby ' s eyes at times , which I did not like ."
Are those who have been disappointed in their first choice , whether from the inconstancy of its object , or the perverseness of circumstances , to be equally indifferent during the rest of their lives ?"
What a very good - looking man !"
CHAPTER 30
A lady always does .-- She said enough to shew there need not be despair -- and to invite him to say more himself .
I could not bear to leave the country in a manner that might lead you , or the rest of the neighbourhood , to suspect any part of what had really passed between Mrs . Smith and myself -- and I resolved therefore on calling at the cottage , in my way to Honiton .
She was nobody when he married her , barely the daughter of a gentleman ; but ever since her being turned into a Churchill she has out - Churchill ' d them all in high and mighty claims : but in herself , I assure you , she is an upstart ."
Harriet , who had been standing in no unhappy reverie , was yet very glad to be called from it , by the now encouraging manner of such a judge , and such a friend as Miss Woodhouse , and only wanted invitation , to give the history of her hopes with great , though trembling delight .-- Emma ' s tremblings as she asked , and as she listened , were better concealed than Harriet ' s , but they were not less .
Elinor would not oppose his opinion , because , whatever might be her general estimation of the advantage of a public school , she could not think of Edward ' s abode in Mr . Pratt ' s family , with any satisfaction .
While Captains Wentworth and Harville led the talk on one side of the room , and by recurring to former days , supplied anecdotes in abundance to occupy and entertain the others , it fell to Anne ' s lot to be placed rather apart with Captain Benwick ; and a very good impulse of her nature obliged her to begin an acquaintance with him .
As she spoke , she felt that Captain Wentworth was looking at her , the consciousness of which vexed and embarrassed her , and made her regret that she had said so much , simple as it was .
You saw how hysterical I was yesterday ."
Marianne saw and listened with increasing surprise .
She could see nothing but evil in it .
My illness , I well knew , had been entirely brought on by myself by such negligence of my own health , as I had felt even at the time to be wrong .
-- in the utmost amazement --" well , sir ,-- be quick -- and if you can -- less violent ."
And yet some of the plate would have been a very pleasant addition to our own stock here ."
He was a married man , and without children ; the very state to be wished for .
You would rob it of its simplicity by imaginary improvement !
With the prospect of spending at least two months at Uppercross , it was highly incumbent on her to clothe her imagination , her memory , and all her ideas in as much of Uppercross as possible .
She knew the ways of Uppercross as well as those of Kellynch .
And looked back , with fond regret , to the bustles of Uppercross and the seclusion of Kellynch .
` My friend Knightley ' had been so often mentioned , that I was really impatient to see him ; and I must do my caro sposo the justice to say that he need not be ashamed of his friend .
It would have killed me never to come to Hartfield any more !"
His situation is an evil -- but you must consider it as what satisfies your friend ; and I will answer for your thinking better and better of him as you know him more .
The rest of the party were now returning , and all were soon collected .
He begged their pardon , but he had forgotten his gloves , and instantly crossing the room to the writing table , he drew out a letter from under the scattered paper , placed it before Anne with eyes of glowing entreaty fixed on her for a time , and hastily collecting his gloves , was again out of the room , almost before Mrs Musgrove was aware of his being in it : the work of an instant !
But I can ' t bear to see them dirty and nasty .
His remembrance can be overcome by no change of circumstances or opinions .
Another hour or two ' s snow can hardly make the road impassable ; and we are two carriages ; if one is blown over in the bleak part of the common field there will be the other at hand .
Miss Elliot was to have the honour of calling on Mrs Musgrove in the course of the morning ; and Anne walked off with Charles and Mary , to go and see her and Henrietta directly .
She felt that he had every thing to elevate him which general attention and deference , and especially the attention of all the young women , could do .
She could not respect his eye , but his love and his complaisance were unexceptionable .
Excellent dancing indeed !-- Yes , my dear , I ran home , as I said I should , to help grandmama to bed , and got back again , and nobody missed me .-- I set off without saying a word , just as I told you .
Promising to be with them the whole of the following morning , therefore , she closed the fatigues of the present by a toilsome walk to Camden Place , there to spend the evening chiefly in listening to the busy arrangements of Elizabeth and Mrs Clay for the morrow ' s party , the frequent enumeration of the persons invited , and the continually improving detail of all the embellishments which were to make it the most completely elegant of its kind in Bath , while harassing herself with the never - ending question , of whether Captain Wentworth would come or not ?
no ; I was pleased with my own perseverance in asking questions ; and amused to think how little information I obtained ."
Neither time , nor health , nor life , to be called your own .
" Are you quite sure of it ?"
dear , no ," said her companion .
But soon afterwards , rising and pacing the room , he observed sarcastically --
Did he see you last summer or autumn , ` somewhere down in the west ,' to use her own words , without knowing it to be you ?"
said Marianne , as she wandered alone before the house , on the last evening of their being there ; " when shall I cease to regret you !-- when learn to feel a home elsewhere !-- Oh !
An account of the concert was immediately claimed ; and Anne ' s recollections of the concert were quite happy enough to animate her features and make her rejoice to talk of it .
exclaimed Mr . Knightley loudly and warmly ; and with calmer asperity , added , a few moments afterwards , " No , he is not her equal indeed , for he is as much her superior in sense as in situation .
It would grieve me indeed to be obliged to think ill of you ; but if I am to do it , if I am to learn that you are not what we have hitherto believed you , that your regard for us all was insincere , that your behaviour to me was intended only to deceive , let it be told as soon as possible .
His admiration was certainly very warm ; yet she thought , but for Mrs . Weston , it would not have struck her .
" Certainly , there can be no difference ; for Robert will now to all intents and purposes be considered as the eldest son ;-- and as to any thing else , they are both very agreeable young men : I do not know that one is superior to the other ."
The manoeuvres of selfishness and duplicity must ever be revolting , but I have heard nothing which really surprises me .
How long it had been carrying on between them , however , he was equally at a loss with herself to make out ; for at Oxford , where he had remained for choice ever since his quitting London , he had had no means of hearing of her but from herself , and her letters to the very last were neither less frequent , nor less affectionate than usual .
for shame !"
Encouragement should be given .
But this good old Mr . Woodhouse , I wish you had heard his gallant speeches to me at dinner .
" Me , brother !
-- but checking her desire , confined herself to this silent ejaculation .
Charles wonders what Captain Wentworth will say ; but if you remember , I never thought him attached to Louisa ; I never could see anything of it .
But now , after such dishonorable usage , who can tell what were his designs on her .
Receive it on my judgment .
cried Emma , " I know there is not a better creature in the world : but you must allow , that what is good and what is ridiculous are most unfortunately blended in her ."
He told me the whole story .
" Writing to each other ," said Lucy , returning the letter into her pocket , " is the only comfort we have in such long separations .
No more is Emma .
( with a little sigh of sentiment ).
A widow Mrs Smith ; and who was her husband ?
" No , no ; your room is full enough .
But he judged it unnecessary : he had still something more to try , some more fresh application , of whose success he was as confident as the last , and his visit concluded with encouraging assurances which reached the ear , but could not enter the heart of Miss Dashwood .
No second meeting had there yet been between him and Emma .
cried he .
Marianne was to have the best place by the fire , was to be tempted to eat by every delicacy in the house , and to be amused by the relation of all the news of the day .
Well , I shall spirit up the Colonel as soon as I can .
You may think , Miss Elliot , whether he is dear to us !"
How does Miss Smith do ?
The whole party walked about , and looked , and praised again ; and then , having nothing else to do , formed a sort of half - circle round the fire , to observe in their various modes , till other subjects were started , that , though _May_ , a fire in the evening was still very pleasant .
Elizabeth , though resenting the suspicion , might yet be made observant by it .
Mr . Knightley had done all in his power for Mr . Woodhouse ' s entertainment .
You are always with me ."
` Three things very dull indeed .'
You have perhaps been misinformed , or purposely deceived , in something concerning me , which may have lowered me in your opinion .
She was extremely angry with herself .
But when the second moment had passed , when she found every doubt , every solicitude removed , compared her situation with what so lately it had been ,-- saw him honourably released from his former engagement , saw him instantly profiting by the release , to address herself and declare an affection as tender , as constant as she had ever supposed it to be ,-- she was oppressed , she was overcome by her own felicity ;-- and happily disposed as is the human mind to be easily familiarized with any change for the better , it required several hours to give sedateness to her spirits , or any degree of tranquillity to her heart .
Here it is ; I would not burn it , because being even then very little satisfied with Mr Elliot , I was determined to preserve every document of former intimacy .
She thought so well of the letter , that when Mr . Knightley came again , she desired him to read it .
" There now ,"-- said his lady , " you see Mr . Palmer expects you ; so you cannot refuse to come ."
" You have not been long enough in Bath ," said he , " to enjoy the evening parties of the place ."
She will be disagreeable in infancy , and correct herself as she grows older .
Could she have chosen with whom to associate , she would not have chosen her .
Mr . Knightley had spoken prophetically , when he once said , " Emma , you have been no friend to Harriet Smith ."
But whatever might be the particulars of their separation , her sister ' s affliction was indubitable ; and she thought with the tenderest compassion of that violent sorrow which Marianne was in all probability not merely giving way to as a relief , but feeding and encouraging as a duty .
You will tell Sir Walter what we have done , and that Mr Shepherd thinks it the greatest improvement the house ever had .
A proper establishment of servants , a carriage , perhaps two , and hunters , cannot be supported on less ."
He might have been in Mr Elliot ' s company , but she had not courage to ask the question .
" So scrupulous for others ," he continued , " and yet so careless for herself !
I believe in a true analogy between our bodily frames and our mental ; and that as our bodies are the strongest , so are our feelings ; capable of bearing most rough usage , and riding out the heaviest weather ."
She does not depend upon his coming so much as I do : but she does not know the parties so well as I do .
It was a pity that she had not come back earlier !
There was a little blush , and then this answer ,
When you have been here a little longer , Miss Fairfax , you will understand that Mr . Elton is the standard of perfection in Highbury , both in person and mind ."
no -- a very bad plan .
The clock struck eight .
The visitors took their leave ; and Charles , having civilly seen them off , and then made a face at them , and abused them for coming , began with --
" I did not mean , I was not thinking of the slave - trade ," replied Jane ; " governess - trade , I assure you , was all that I had in view ; widely different certainly as to the guilt of those who carry it on ; but as to the greater misery of the victims , I do not know where it lies .
" You are very wrong .
" How can that be done ?
Pray take care , Miss Woodhouse , ours is rather a dark staircase -- rather darker and narrower than one could wish .
I had hoped that her regard for me would support her under any difficulty , and for some time it did ; but at last the misery of her situation , for she experienced great unkindness , overcame all her resolution , and though she had promised me that nothing -- but how blindly I relate !
Every body seemed injured by me .
` Forty ,' replied Sir Basil , ` forty , and no more .'
If I was wrong in yielding to persuasion once , remember that it was to persuasion exerted on the side of safety , not of risk .
Are you in any doubt as to that ?
She was a great talker upon little matters , which exactly suited Mr . Woodhouse , full of trivial communications and harmless gossip .
I never compliment .
Mrs Croft left them , and Captain Wentworth , having sealed his letter with great rapidity , was indeed ready , and had even a hurried , agitated air , which shewed impatience to be gone .
But , I confess , it would give me great pleasure to call Colonel Brandon brother .
Their road to this detached cottage was down Vicarage Lane , a lane leading at right angles from the broad , though irregular , main street of the place ; and , as may be inferred , containing the blessed abode of Mr . Elton .
Mr . Knightley , what a delightful party last night ; how extremely pleasant .-- Did you ever see such dancing ?-- Was not it delightful ?-- Miss Woodhouse and Mr . Frank Churchill ; I never saw any thing equal to it ."
Captain Wentworth recollected him perfectly .
" It is a great pity that their circumstances should be so confined !
" He is a person I never think of from one month ' s end to another ," said Mr . Knightley , with a degree of vexation , which made Emma immediately talk of something else , though she could not comprehend why he should be angry .
I see you know nothing of the matter .
" Upon my word , Emma , to hear you abusing the reason you have , is almost enough to make me think so too .
Soup too !
I have been doubting and considering as to what I ought to tell you .
" It seems like madness !
Give me joy : I have got rid of Sir Walter and Miss .
There was consciousness of some sort or other .
And for my part , I was all in a fright for fear your sister should ask us for the huswifes she had gave us a day or two before ; but , however , nothing was said about them , and I took care to keep mine out of sight .
About four days after Edward ' s arrival Colonel Brandon appeared , to complete Mrs . Dashwood ' s satisfaction , and to give her the dignity of having , for the first time since her living at Barton , more company with her than her house would hold .
Harriet Smith marries Robert Martin ."
She is the natural daughter of nobody knows whom , with probably no settled provision at all , and certainly no respectable relations .
Mary , resenting that she should be supposed not to know her own cousin , began talking very warmly about the family features , and protesting still more positively that it was Mr Elliot , calling again upon Anne to come and look for herself , but Anne did not mean to stir , and tried to be cool and unconcerned .
Some more of the Careys came to dinner , and they had the pleasure of sitting down nearly twenty to table , which Sir John observed with great contentment .
" You are mistaken ," said he gently , " that is not good company ; that is the best .
" You are very kind ," said Lady Middleton to Elinor ; " and as you really like the work , perhaps you will be as well pleased not to cut in till another rubber , or will you take your chance now ?"
The Frank Churchill so long talked of , so high in interest , was actually before her -- he was presented to her , and she did not think too much had been said in his praise ; he was a _very_ good looking young man ; height , air , address , all were unexceptionable , and his countenance had a great deal of the spirit and liveliness of his father ' s ; he looked quick and sensible .
She treated her therefore , with all the indulgent fondness of a parent towards a favourite child on the last day of its holidays .
" Colonel Wallis !
A morning of thorough confusion was to be expected .
He turned to Mrs . Weston to implore her assistance , " Would not she give him her support ?-- would not she add her persuasions to his , to induce Miss Woodhouse not to go to Mrs . Goddard ' s till it were certain that Miss Smith ' s disorder had no infection ?
" Knightley has taken pity on poor little Miss Smith !-- Very goodnatured , I declare ."
He does not give the least fling at Benwick ; does not so much as say , ` I wonder at it , I have a reason of my own for wondering at it .'
Do not you , Anne ?
She was aware herself , that , parting under any other circumstances , they certainly should have corresponded more , and that her intelligence would not have rested , as it now almost wholly did , on Isabella ' s letters .
It was dreadfully mortifying ; but Mr . Elton was proving himself , in many respects , the very reverse of what she had meant and believed him ; proud , assuming , conceited ; very full of his own claims , and little concerned about the feelings of others .
Willoughby .-- Remember that you are married .
The quietness of the game made it particularly eligible for Mr . Woodhouse , who had often been distressed by the more animated sort , which Mr . Weston had occasionally introduced , and who now sat happily occupied in lamenting , with tender melancholy , over the departure of the " poor little boys ," or in fondly pointing out , as he took up any stray letter near him , how beautifully Emma had written it .
" Oh !
However , she seems a very obliging , pretty - behaved young lady , and no doubt will make him a very good wife .
" Nor , if you were , could I ever bear to part with you , my Harriet .
Use your own discretion , however , in communicating to her what I have told you .
And all this was said with a truth and sincerity of feeling irresistible .
She was as handsome a girl last September , as I ever saw ; and as likely to attract the man .
It is always the lady ' s right to decide on the degree of acquaintance .
" You will stay , I am sure ; you will stay and nurse her ;" cried he , turning to her and speaking with a glow , and yet a gentleness , which seemed almost restoring the past .
At length Lucy exclaimed with a deep sigh ,
" As to all that ," rejoined Sir Walter coolly , " supposing I were induced to let my house , I have by no means made up my mind as to the privileges to be annexed to it .
He and Mary had been persuaded to go early to their inn last night .
I will tell you why she is out of spirits .
Emma watched them in , and then joined Harriet at the interesting counter ,-- trying , with all the force of her own mind , to convince her that if she wanted plain muslin it was of no use to look at figured ; and that a blue ribbon , be it ever so beautiful , would still never match her yellow pattern .
That ' s the worst of him ."
" To be sure .
" Well , and I had heard of you as a very pretty girl , and what were we to wait for besides ?
" No , to be sure you could not ; but I never thought of that before .
You will be delighted with them I am sure .
Not aware of their being in town , however , I blundered on Sir John , I believe , the first day of his coming , and the day after I had called at Mrs . Jennings ' s .
Mr . Weston , his son , Emma , and Harriet , only remained ; and the young man ' s spirits now rose to a pitch almost unpleasant .
" Well , then , when will you come back again ?"
cried Emma , after a moment ' s pause --" What do you mean ?-- Good Heaven !
They are good - natured people , and think little of their own claims ; but still they must feel that any body ' s hurrying away is no great compliment ; and Miss Woodhouse ' s doing it would be more thought of than any other person ' s in the room .
It must be all conjecture ."
Mrs . Weston , kind - hearted and musical , was particularly interested by the circumstance , and Emma could not help being amused at her perseverance in dwelling on the subject ; and having so much to ask and to say as to tone , touch , and pedal , totally unsuspicious of that wish of saying as little about it as possible , which she plainly read in the fair heroine ' s countenance .
It was put an end to by Mrs . Dashwood , who felt obliged to hope that he had left Mrs . Ferrars very well .
" Wrong !
And Jane Fairfax , too , of all women !"
Mrs . and Miss Bates occupied the drawing - room floor ; and there , in the very moderate - sized apartment , which was every thing to them , the visitors were most cordially and even gratefully welcomed ; the quiet neat old lady , who with her knitting was seated in the warmest corner , wanting even to give up her place to Miss Woodhouse , and her more active , talking daughter , almost ready to overpower them with care and kindness , thanks for their visit , solicitude for their shoes , anxious inquiries after Mr . Woodhouse ' s health , cheerful communications about her mother ' s , and sweet - cake from the beaufet --" Mrs . Cole had just been there , just called in for ten minutes , and had been so good as to sit an hour with them , and _she_ had taken a piece of cake and been so kind as to say she liked it very much ; and , therefore , she hoped Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith would do them the favour to eat a piece too ."
She was not yet quite able to see him and his charming happy wife together , without feeling uncomfortable .
Why should there be any change ?"
I shall not attempt calling on Mrs . Goddard , for I really do not think she cares for any thing but _boiled_ pork : when we dress the leg it will be another thing .
" Was Mr . Ferrars in the carriage with her ?"
" Your behaviour was certainly very wrong ," said she ; " because -- to say nothing of my own conviction , our relations were all led away by it to fancy and expect WHAT , as you were THEN situated , could never be ."
No sooner did she perceive any symptom of love in his behaviour to Elinor , than she considered their serious attachment as certain , and looked forward to their marriage as rapidly approaching .
CHAPTER 33
What an immense time Mrs Clay has been staying with Elizabeth !
Nothing of the sort had ever occurred before to any young ladies in the place , within her memory ; no rencontre , no alarm of the kind ;-- and now it had happened to the very person , and at the very hour , when the other very person was chancing to pass by to rescue her !-- It certainly was very extraordinary !-- And knowing , as she did , the favourable state of mind of each at this period , it struck her the more .
" But still , not near enough to give me a chance of being right , if we think differently ."
And now , Elinor , what have you to say ?"
It may bring many extenuations .
The day of separation and departure arrived ; and Marianne , after taking so particular and lengthened a leave of Mrs . Jennings , one so earnestly grateful , so full of respect and kind wishes as seemed due to her own heart from a secret acknowledgment of past inattention , and bidding Colonel Brandon farewell with a cordiality of a friend , was carefully assisted by him into the carriage , of which he seemed anxious that she should engross at least half .
A superior performer !-- very far from it , I assure you .
Nobody could tell .
cried she playfully .
Mrs Smith gave a most good - humoured acquiescence .
Jane says that Colonel Campbell is a little deaf .
Mary ' s declaration was , " I hate sending the children to the Great House , though their grandmamma is always wanting to see them , for she humours and indulges them to such a degree , and gives them so much trash and sweet things , that they are sure to come back sick and cross for the rest of the day ."
" Oh !
The only time I ever really suffered in body or mind , the only time that I ever fancied myself unwell , or had any ideas of danger , was the winter that I passed by myself at Deal , when the Admiral ( Captain Croft then ) was in the North Seas .
I shall keep it only till you can claim it .
The regular and best families Emma could hardly suppose they would presume to invite -- neither Donwell , nor Hartfield , nor Randalls .
But do not imagine that I did not feel it an evil in itself ."
I believe he is one of the very best - tempered men that ever existed .
" Aye , aye , the parsonage is but a small one ," said she , after the first ebullition of surprise and satisfaction was over , " and very likely MAY be out of repair ; but to hear a man apologising , as I thought , for a house that to my knowledge has five sitting rooms on the ground - floor , and I think the housekeeper told me could make up fifteen beds !-- and to you too , that had been used to live in Barton cottage !-- It seems quite ridiculous .
I wish him very happy ; and I am so sure of his always doing his duty , that though now he may harbour some regret , in the end he must become so .
Had you seen his look , his manner , had you heard his voice at that moment !
Anne could not have supposed it possible that her first evening in Camden Place could have passed so well !
The impertinence of these kind of scrutinies , moreover , was generally concluded with a compliment , which though meant as its douceur , was considered by Marianne as the greatest impertinence of all ; for after undergoing an examination into the value and make of her gown , the colour of her shoes , and the arrangement of her hair , she was almost sure of being told that upon " her word she looked vastly smart , and she dared to say she would make a great many conquests ."
I am afraid of her , as I have told you before , quite afraid of her , because she is so very clever ; but I respect her amazingly , and wish we had such a neighbour at Uppercross ."
" Good God !"
They shew her to the greatest advantage .
So would poor little Harriet .
I do not pretend to it .
He came to speak to his father on a subject ,-- to announce an attachment --"
" You sent me such a good account of yourself on Thursday !"
And so you are most comfortably settled in your little cottage and want for nothing !
" Where is Marianne ?
What is passable in youth is detestable in later age .
Those who can barely live , and who live perforce in a very small , and generally very inferior , society , may well be illiberal and cross .
I am very much afraid that it will all end in nothing .
The attentions of a certain person can hardly be among the tittle - tattle of Highbury yet .
" I never was in better health ."
All the surprise and suspense , and every other painful part of the morning dissipated by this conversation , she re - entered the house so happy as to be obliged to find an alloy in some momentary apprehensions of its being impossible to last .
She was a beautiful creature when she came to you , but , in my opinion , the attractions you have added are infinitely superior to what she received from nature ."
" Almost every moment .
Charles Hayter had been at Lyme oftener than suited her ; and when they dined with the Harvilles there had been only a maid - servant to wait , and at first Mrs Harville had always given Mrs Musgrove precedence ; but then , she had received so very handsome an apology from her on finding out whose daughter she was , and there had been so much going on every day , there had been so many walks between their lodgings and the Harvilles , and she had got books from the library , and changed them so often , that the balance had certainly been much in favour of Lyme .
The calm and polite unconcern of Lady Middleton on the occasion was a happy relief to Elinor ' s spirits , oppressed as they often were by the clamorous kindness of the others .
They are very , very kind in their visits .
Time had changed him , or Louisa had changed him .
And as to my dear little boys , I must say , that if Aunt Emma has not time for them , I do not think they would fare much better with Uncle Knightley , who is absent from home about five hours where she is absent one -- and who , when he is at home , is either reading to himself or settling his accounts ."
Here is excellent room for three , I assure you .
On the contrary , with a mind and body alike strengthened by rest , she looked and spoke with more genuine spirit , anticipating the pleasure of Margaret ' s return , and talking of the dear family party which would then be restored , of their mutual pursuits and cheerful society , as the only happiness worth a wish .
" You owe me no apologies ; and every body to whom you might be supposed to owe them , is so perfectly satisfied , so delighted even --"
He presently added , with a smile ,
Jane ' s alertness in moving , proved her as ready as her aunt had preconceived .
Better than nearer !
At last Jane began , and though the first bars were feebly given , the powers of the instrument were gradually done full justice to .
He heard her with the most earnest attention , but seeming to recollect himself , said no more on the subject , and began directly to speak of his pleasure at seeing them in London , making the usual inquiries about their journey , and the friends they had left behind .
My affection for Marianne , my thorough conviction of her attachment to me -- it was all insufficient to outweigh that dread of poverty , or get the better of those false ideas of the necessity of riches , which I was naturally inclined to feel , and expensive society had increased .
Edward , she believed , was still in town , and fortunately she had heard his address from Miss Steele .
The Admiral abused him for his want of gallantry .
His affections seemed to reanimate towards them all , and his interest in their welfare again became perceptible .
That she is old and sickly .
There was nothing less for Lady Russell to do , than to admit that she had been pretty completely wrong , and to take up a new set of opinions and of hopes .
I have often known it done myself ."
And I do not think Mr . Ferrars can be displeased , when he knows I have trusted you , because I know he has the highest opinion in the world of all your family , and looks upon yourself and the other Miss Dashwoods quite as his own sisters ."
" But you , yourself , brought Mrs Harville , her sister , her cousin , and three children , round from Portsmouth to Plymouth .
Man ' s boasted power and freedom , all are flown .
" Beautifully indeed !
That he did not regard it as a desperate case , that he did not say a few hours must end it , was at first felt , beyond the hope of most ; and the ecstasy of such a reprieve , the rejoicing , deep and silent , after a few fervent ejaculations of gratitude to Heaven had been offered , may be conceived .
Is your loss such as leaves no opening for consolation ?
" Nothing , for you have anticipated my answer ."
She had already been obliged to tell Lady Russell that Louisa Musgrove was to marry Captain Benwick .
" At Longstaple !"
After another short silence --
" Have you heard from Miss Fairfax so lately ?
It began to rain , not much , but enough to make shelter desirable for women , and quite enough to make it very desirable for Miss Elliot to have the advantage of being conveyed home in Lady Dalrymple ' s carriage , which was seen waiting at a little distance ; she , Anne , and Mrs Clay , therefore , turned into Molland ' s , while Mr Elliot stepped to Lady Dalrymple , to request her assistance .
" Could not she see that we wanted her gone !-- how teazing to Edward !"
This meeting of the two parties proved highly satisfactory , and decided the whole business at once .
His circumstances are now unembarrassed -- he suffers from no evil of that kind ; and he thinks only that he has married a woman of a less amiable temper than yourself .
" They told me -- that Mr . Martin dined with them last Saturday ."
" I have always admired her complexion ," replied Emma , archly ; " but do not I remember the time when you found fault with her for being so pale ?-- When we first began to talk of her .-- Have you quite forgotten ?"
Still , however , he was not happy .
Hazle eyes excepted , two years more might make her all that he wished .
I absolutely cannot do without music .
I am sorry for it .
She could now answer as she ought ; and was happy to feel , when Mrs Croft ' s next words explained it to be Mr Wentworth of whom she spoke , that she had said nothing which might not do for either brother .
Miss Smith , the step at the turning ."
The bitter feelings occasioned by this speech , the many bitter feelings , made the utmost exertion necessary on Emma ' s side , to enable her to say on reply ,
She was confined for some days to the house ; but never had any confinement been less irksome .
" Mr . Frank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse flirted together excessively ."
Scenes had passed in Uppercross which made it precious .
" That is exactly what I think of him ," cried Marianne .
" If we were in the other room ," said Emma , " if I had my writing - desk , I am sure I could produce a specimen .
Instead of staying at Lyme , he went off to Plymouth , and then he went off to see Edward .
From Harriet ' s happening not to be at Hartfield , and her father ' s being present to engage Mr . Elton , she had a quarter of an hour of the lady ' s conversation to herself , and could composedly attend to her ; and the quarter of an hour quite convinced her that Mrs . Elton was a vain woman , extremely well satisfied with herself , and thinking much of her own importance ; that she meant to shine and be very superior , but with manners which had been formed in a bad school , pert and familiar ; that all her notions were drawn from one set of people , and one style of living ; that if not foolish she was ignorant , and that her society would certainly do Mr . Elton no good .
The whole story would have been speedily formed under her active imagination ; and every thing established in the most melancholy order of disastrous love .
You had better come earlier another time , because we are generally out by one .
Mrs . Jennings was a widow with an ample jointure .
I should have expected better judgment in Colonel Campbell ."
" The rent of this cottage is said to be low ; but we have it on very hard terms , if we are to dine at the park whenever any one is staying either with them , or with us ."
He endured too well , stood too well with every body .
My business is with you , and only you ."
" Something a little inferior I shall of course put up with , but it must not be much .
For one daughter , his eldest , he would really have given up any thing , which he had not been very much tempted to do .
" My dear Frederick , you are talking quite idly .
Elinor thought she could distinguish a large W in the direction ; and no sooner was it complete than Marianne , ringing the bell , requested the footman who answered it to get that letter conveyed for her to the two - penny post .
The Miss Musgroves agreed to it ; and having all kindly watched him as far up the hill as they could , they returned to the breakfast table .
" Oh !
Known to have some influence with her sister , she was continually requested , or at least receiving hints to exert it , beyond what was practicable .
They were received with great cordiality .
It was the highest satisfaction to her to believe Captain Wentworth not in the least aware of the pain he was occasioning .
replied Elinor , " why should you think so ?
" So obliging of you !
By this time , the walk in the rain had reached Mrs . Elton , and her remonstrances now opened upon Jane .
Miss Fairfax must already have given her account .-- I shall not commit myself by claiming more than she may chuse to allow ."
She was sure that he had not been happy in marriage .
Weather becomes absolutely of no consequence .
This was all that was generally known of her history .
Anne had never submitted more reluctantly to the jealous and ill - judging claims of Mary ; but so it must be , and they set off for the town , Charles taking care of his sister , and Captain Benwick attending to her .
" Well , well , I have that note ; and can shew it after dinner to convince Mr .
" Who !
" But I ought to have looked about me more ," said Anne , conscious while she spoke that there had in fact been no want of looking about , that the object only had been deficient .
Marianne was spared from the troublesome feelings of contempt and resentment , on this impertinent examination of their features , and on the puppyism of his manner in deciding on all the different horrors of the different toothpick - cases presented to his inspection , by remaining unconscious of it all ; for she was as well able to collect her thoughts within herself , and be as ignorant of what was passing around her , in Mr . Gray ' s shop , as in her own bedroom .
I should like the work exceedingly , if she would allow me a share in it ."
Elinor , for some time after he left her , for some time even after the sound of his carriage had died away , remained too much oppressed by a crowd of ideas , widely differing in themselves , but of which sadness was the general result , to think even of her sister .
Mr . Harris , who attended her every day , still talked boldly of a speedy recovery , and Miss Dashwood was equally sanguine ; but the expectation of the others was by no means so cheerful .
But I too have been thinking over the past , and a question has suggested itself , whether there may not have been one person more my enemy even than that lady ?
It is a difference of opinion which does not admit of proof .
The cold , however , was severe ; and by the time the second carriage was in motion , a few flakes of snow were finding their way down , and the sky had the appearance of being so overcharged as to want only a milder air to produce a very white world in a very short time .
These were the ladies whom Emma found herself very frequently able to collect ; and happy was she , for her father ' s sake , in the power ; though , as far as she was herself concerned , it was no remedy for the absence of Mrs . Weston .
" I have something to tell you , Emma ; some news ."
As soon as they were fairly ascending Belmont , he began --
He certainly loved her .
It was a night of almost equal suffering to both .
When the Westons arrived , the kindest looks of love , the strongest of admiration were for her , from both husband and wife ; the son approached her with a cheerful eagerness which marked her as his peculiar object , and at dinner she found him seated by her -- and , as she firmly believed , not without some dexterity on his side .
Chapter 6
He had been several years at sea , and had , in the course of those removals to which all midshipmen are liable , and especially such midshipmen as every captain wishes to get rid of , been six months on board Captain Frederick Wentworth ' s frigate , the Laconia ; and from the Laconia he had , under the influence of his captain , written the only two letters which his father and mother had ever received from him during the whole of his absence ; that is to say , the only two disinterested letters ; all the rest had been mere applications for money .
What an air of probability sometimes runs through a dream !
Anne felt that she should like to know who he was .
Edward is only to hold the living till the person to whom the Colonel has really sold the presentation , is old enough to take it .-- Aye , aye , that is the fact , depend upon it ."
Poor Mr . Woodhouse was silent from consternation ; but every body else had something to say ; every body was either surprized or not surprized , and had some question to ask , or some comfort to offer .
CHAPTER 26
This is not the place for explanations .
replied her mother with a smile .
I never had much opinion of the sea air ."
Mr . Knightley , always so kind , so feeling , so truly considerate for every body , would never deserve to be less worshipped than now ; and it really was too much to hope even of Harriet , that she could be in love with more than _three_ men in one year .
After the usual period of suspense , the usual sounds of approach were heard , and " Mr and Mrs Charles Musgrove " were ushered into the room .
You really are a very sad girl , and do not know how to take care of yourself .-- To the post - office indeed !
She thanked him with brief , though fervent gratitude , and while he went to hurry off his servant with a message to Mr . Harris , and an order for post - horses directly , she wrote a few lines to her mother .
Rub her hands , rub her temples ; here are salts ; take them , take them ."
Mr . Woodhouse would have been miserable had his daughter attempted it , and she was therefore safe from either exciting or receiving unpleasant and most unsuitable ideas .
You must not judge of him , Miss Dashwood , from YOUR slight acquaintance .-- Poor Edward !-- His manners are certainly not the happiest in nature .-- But we are not all born , you know , with the same powers ,-- the same address .-- Poor fellow !-- to see him in a circle of strangers !-- to be sure it was pitiable enough !-- but upon my soul , I believe he has as good a heart as any in the kingdom ; and I declare and protest to you I never was so shocked in my life , as when it all burst forth .
I wonder whereabouts they will upset to - day .
Tell me how Miss Fairfax is ."
" So you and I are to be left to shift by ourselves , with this poor sick child ; and not a creature coming near us all the evening !
Her sleep , though not so quiet as Elinor wished to see it , lasted a considerable time ; and anxious to observe the result of it herself , she resolved to sit with her during the whole of it .
I went for only one night , and could not get away till that very day se ' nnight ."
" Thank you , ma ' am ," said Elinor .
She ran away to indulge the inclination , leaving the tender and the sublime of pleasure to Harriet ' s share .
" She would rather not be in his company more than she could help .
Oh , Elinor , how incomprehensible are your feelings !
he must and shall come back ," cried Sir John .
Indeed , I think I may say that you cannot , for your behaviour to him is perfectly cordial , and if THAT were your opinion , I am sure you could never be civil to him ."
Within half an hour it was known all over Highbury .
Mr . Weston might be his son ' s superior .-- In spite of this little rub , however , Emma was smiling with enjoyment , delighted to see the respectable length of the set as it was forming , and to feel that she had so many hours of unusual festivity before her .-- She was more disturbed by Mr . Knightley ' s not dancing than by any thing else .-- There he was , among the standers - by , where he ought not to be ; he ought to be dancing ,-- not classing himself with the husbands , and fathers , and whist - players , who were pretending to feel an interest in the dance till their rubbers were made up ,-- so young as he looked !-- He could not have appeared to greater advantage perhaps anywhere , than where he had placed himself .
In a few minutes , however , Marianne was recovered enough to put an end to the bustle , and sit down among the rest ; though her spirits retained the impression of what had passed , the whole evening .
Are you speaking of -- Mr .
Her brother ' s return was the first comfort ; he could take best care of his wife ; and the second blessing was the arrival of the apothecary .
Mr . Elton had retreated into the card - room , looking ( Emma trusted ) very foolish .
The sad accident at Lyme was soon the prevailing topic , and on comparing their latest accounts of the invalid , it appeared that each lady dated her intelligence from the same hour of yestermorn ; that Captain Wentworth had been in Kellynch yesterday ( the first time since the accident ), had brought Anne the last note , which she had not been able to trace the exact steps of ; had staid a few hours and then returned again to Lyme , and without any present intention of quitting it any more .
" As for the house itself , to be sure ," said she , " it is too small for our family , but we will make ourselves tolerably comfortable for the present , as it is too late in the year for improvements .
" Go to him , Elinor ," she cried , as soon as she could speak , " and force him to come to me .
That was his motive for drawing back , I can assure you .
" Mr . Elton , this is the most extraordinary conduct !
He is desperately in love and means to marry her ."
to which his prompt reply was , " Most readily , Mrs . Weston , if you will dance with me ."
Mary , too , was growing calmer .
My friend Lord Courtland came to me the other day on purpose to ask my advice , and laid before me three different plans of Bonomi ' s .
At last --
She could say no more ; her spirits were quite overcome , and hiding her face on Elinor ' s shoulder , she burst into tears .
How to understand the deceptions she had been thus practising on herself , and living under !-- The blunders , the blindness of her own head and heart !-- she sat still , she walked about , she tried her own room , she tried the shrubbery -- in every place , every posture , she perceived that she had acted most weakly ; that she had been imposed on by others in a most mortifying degree ; that she had been imposing on herself in a degree yet more mortifying ; that she was wretched , and should probably find this day but the beginning of wretchedness .
The truth was , that Elizabeth had been long enough in Bath to understand the importance of a man of such an air and appearance as his .
Your countenance perfectly informs me that you were in company last night with the person whom you think the most agreeable in the world , the person who interests you at this present time more than all the rest of the world put together ."
" Oh !
His acquittal was complete , his friendship warmly honoured , a lively interest excited for his friend , and his description of the fine country about Lyme so feelingly attended to by the party , that an earnest desire to see Lyme themselves , and a project for going thither was the consequence .
Had he been even old , ugly , and vulgar , the gratitude and kindness of Mrs . Dashwood would have been secured by any act of attention to her child ; but the influence of youth , beauty , and elegance , gave an interest to the action which came home to her feelings .
Nothing ever happened on either side that was not announced immediately .
Her eyes were bright and her cheeks glowed ; but she knew nothing about it .
I have seen you only as the admirer of my friend .
He was quite as undaunted and as lively as ever ; and , after seeing him , Emma thus moralised to herself :--
Mr . Weston ' s dining - room does not accommodate more than ten comfortably ; and for my part , I would rather , under such circumstances , fall short by two than exceed by two .
" Oh !
No , it was long enough , broad enough , handsome enough .
It was thus imparted to her , as soon as any opportunity of private conference between them occurred .
She might have been absolutely rich and perfectly healthy , and yet be happy .
I always deserve the best treatment , because I never put up with any other ; and , therefore , you must give me a plain , direct answer .
Mrs . Jennings therefore attending her up stairs into the sick chamber , to satisfy herself that all continued right , left her there again to her charge and her thoughts , and retired to her own room to write letters and sleep .
Indeed I must say that , much as I had heard of him before and much as I had expected , he very far exceeds any thing .
I wish her extremely well : and , no doubt , there are men who might not object to -- Every body has their level : but as for myself , I am not , I think , quite so much at a loss .
He had seen the coachmen , and they both agreed with him in there being nothing to apprehend .
" For the present , the whole affair was to be completely a secret .
Harriet said , " very true ," and she " would not think about it ;" but still she talked of it -- still she could talk of nothing else ; and Emma , at last , in order to put the Martins out of her head , was obliged to hurry on the news , which she had meant to give with so much tender caution ; hardly knowing herself whether to rejoice or be angry , ashamed or only amused , at such a state of mind in poor Harriet -- such a conclusion of Mr . Elton ' s importance with her !
Matrimony , as the origin of change , was always disagreeable ; and he was by no means yet reconciled to his own daughter ' s marrying , nor could ever speak of her but with compassion , though it had been entirely a match of affection , when he was now obliged to part with Miss Taylor too ; and from his habits of gentle selfishness , and of being never able to suppose that other people could feel differently from himself , he was very much disposed to think Miss Taylor had done as sad a thing for herself as for them , and would have been a great deal happier if she had spent all the rest of her life at Hartfield .
" I wish ," said Margaret , striking out a novel thought , " that somebody would give us all a large fortune apiece !"
" Very good humoured , unaffected girls , indeed ," said Mrs Croft , in a tone of calmer praise , such as made Anne suspect that her keener powers might not consider either of them as quite worthy of her brother ; " and a very respectable family .
How to settle the claims of Enscombe and Hartfield had been a continual impediment -- less acknowledged by Mr . Weston than by herself -- but even he had never been able to finish the subject better than by saying --" Those matters will take care of themselves ; the young people will find a way ."
A man like him , in his situation !
But every circumstance that could embitter such an evil seemed uniting to heighten the misery of Marianne in a final separation from Willoughby -- in an immediate and irreconcilable rupture with him .
Depend upon it , a man of six or seven - and - twenty can take care of himself ."
" Then , my dear Isabella , it is the most extraordinary sort of thing in the world , for in general every thing does give you cold .
" For me !"
This was one of her expressions .
cried Mary ; " it must be our cousin ; it must be our Mr Elliot , it must , indeed !
I see it in her cheek , her smile , her vain attempt to frown .
" Well , but Miss Dashwood ," speaking triumphantly , " people may say what they chuse about Mr . Ferrars ' s declaring he would not have Lucy , for it is no such thing I can tell you ; and it is quite a shame for such ill - natured reports to be spread abroad .
" If I had set my heart on Mr . Elton ' s marrying Harriet , it would have been very kind to open my eyes ; but at present I only want to keep Harriet to myself .
Miss Harville only died last June .
Mr . Woodhouse was fond of society in his own way .
Poor Mr . Woodhouse trembled as he sat , and , as Emma had foreseen , would scarcely be satisfied without their promising never to go beyond the shrubbery again .
I dare say he will come in when he knows who is here .
Her care and attention could not be questioned ; they were , in fact , only too great .
He seemed about thirty , and though not handsome , had an agreeable person .
She felt it at her heart .
" I will have you BOTH go ," said Mrs . Dashwood ; " these objections are nonsensical .
From that period his penance had become severe .
Nothing could do away the knowledge of what the latter had suffered through his means , nor remove the guilt of his conduct towards Eliza .
" It will not be in my power to accept their invitation if they do ."
" Oh !
Can it be Neptune ?
Elinor was employed in walking thoughtfully from the fire to the window , from the window to the fire , without knowing that she received warmth from one , or discerning objects through the other ; and Marianne , seated at the foot of the bed , with her head leaning against one of its posts , again took up Willoughby ' s letter , and , after shuddering over every sentence , exclaimed --
By his style , I should imagine it just settled ."
Do not you think so ?"
All Anne ' s wishes had been for the latter .
" How very odd !"
But ( with a smile ) you would be materially benefited in one particular at least -- you would know where to go when you left them ."
For his own sake , I would not have him do so mad a thing ."
" She could not make a very long history , I think , of one such little article of unfounded news ."
Harriet slept at Hartfield that night .
She is always so attentive to them !"
" But gaiety never was a part of MY character ."
Mary need not have feared her sister ' s being in any degree prepared for the news .
" Your indifference , however , towards that unfortunate girl -- I must say it , unpleasant to me as the discussion of such a subject may well be -- your indifference is no apology for your cruel neglect of her .
Lady Middleton was ashamed of doing nothing before them , and the flattery which Lucy was proud to think of and administer at other times , she feared they would despise her for offering .
She had been thinking of him the moment before , as unquestionably sixteen miles distant .-- There was time only for the quickest arrangement of mind .
said Sir Walter , in the height of his good humour .
all alone !
Sir , you are most kind .
She instantly saw that it was not unnoticed by him , that he even observed Marianne as she quitted the room , with such astonishment and concern , as hardly left him the recollection of what civility demanded towards herself .
That was your name for him , was it ?"
I really never could think well of any body who proposed such a thing to any body else ."
" My dear papa , he is three - and - twenty .
There was a family of cousins within a walk of Uppercross , in less affluent circumstances , who depended on the Musgroves for all their pleasures : they would come at any time , and help play at anything , or dance anywhere ; and Anne , very much preferring the office of musician to a more active post , played country dances to them by the hour together ; a kindness which always recommended her musical powers to the notice of Mr and Mrs Musgrove more than anything else , and often drew this compliment ;-- " Well done , Miss Anne !
In some surprise at the familiarity of this question , or at least of the manner in which it was spoken , Elinor replied that she was .
You must go to bed early , my dear -- and I recommend a little gruel to you before you go .-- You and I will have a nice basin of gruel together .
This would not , in itself , have been sufficient for the delicacy of Miss Dashwood ;-- but it was inforced with so much real politeness by Mr . Palmer himself , as , joined to the very great amendment of his manners towards them since her sister had been known to be unhappy , induced her to accept it with pleasure .
said Lucy Steele .
" You are quite in the right ; it was most natural to pay your visit , then "--
Charles , in his real concern and good nature , would go home with her ; there was no preventing him .
" Oh !
Mr . Knightley promises to give up his claim this Christmas -- though you know it is longer since they were with him , than with us ."
Fortunately for her , they had now reached the cottage , and the conversation could be continued no farther .
He was to be introduced , and Mrs Wallis was to be introduced , and everybody was to be introduced .
This appeal to her affections did more than all the rest .
" What a sweet woman Lady Middleton is !"
she cried in evident embarrassment , " it all meant nothing ; a mere joke among ourselves ."
But really I never understood that you were at all connected with that family , and therefore I am a little surprised , I confess , at so serious an inquiry into her character ."
My mother desires her very best compliments and regards , and a thousand thanks , and says you really quite oppress her ."
" Oh !
Miss Marianne must not expect to have all the men to herself .
The result of this distress was , that , with a much more voluntary , cheerful consent than his daughter had ever presumed to hope for at the moment , she was able to fix her wedding - day -- and Mr . Elton was called on , within a month from the marriage of Mr . and Mrs . Robert Martin , to join the hands of Mr . Knightley and Miss Woodhouse .
This however was not the case .
" My dear Harriet , you must not refine too much upon this charade .-- You will betray your feelings improperly , if you are too conscious and too quick , and appear to affix more meaning , or even quite all the meaning which may be affixed to it .
Though her late conversation with her daughter - in - law had made her resolve on remaining at Norland no longer than was unavoidable , it had not produced the smallest effect on her in that point to which it principally tended .
repeated he ; " would they have me beg my mother ' s pardon for Robert ' s ingratitude to HER , and breach of honour to ME ?-- I can make no submission -- I am grown neither humble nor penitent by what has passed .-- I am grown very happy ; but that would not interest .-- I know of no submission that IS proper for me to make ."
" I hope he has had no bad news ," said Lady Middleton .
Two dances , unfortunately , were all that could be allowed .
But Mary did not give into it very graciously , whether from not considering Captain Benwick entitled by birth and situation to be in love with an Elliot , or from not wanting to believe Anne a greater attraction to Uppercross than herself , must be left to be guessed .
She was obliged to repeat and explain it , before it was fully comprehended ; and then , being quite new , farther representations were necessary to make it acceptable .
The complaints and lamentations which politeness had hitherto restrained , now burst forth universally ; and they all agreed again and again how provoking it was to be so disappointed .
Elinor ' s thanks followed this speech with grateful earnestness ; attended too with the assurance of her expecting material advantage to Marianne , from the communication of what had passed .
What I endured in so beholding her -- but I have no right to wound your feelings by attempting to describe it -- I have pained you too much already .
Accordingly their removal was made together , and Anne was set down at Uppercross Cottage , in the first stage of Lady Russell ' s journey .
I certainly have been misunderstanding you , if you feel in doubt as to the _purport_ of your answer .
He caught the word ; it seemed to rouse him at once , and saying only -- " True , true , a surgeon this instant ," was darting away , when Anne eagerly suggested --
His own stomach could bear nothing rich , and he could never believe other people to be different from himself .
In all their dealings and intercourse , Sir Walter Elliot must ever have the precedence .
You have got your answer ready ."
" My dear Emma ," said he at last , with earnest kindness , " do you think you perfectly understand the degree of acquaintance between the gentleman and lady we have been speaking of ?"
CHAPTER IX
.
He had never heard of such books before I mentioned them , but he is determined to get them now as soon as ever he can ."
She was soon convinced that it was not for herself she was feeling at all apprehensive or embarrassed ; it was for him .
But it is impossible not to feel uneasiness .
Knightley ."
Events of every description , changes , alienations , removals -- all , all must be comprised in it , and oblivion of the past -- how natural , how certain too !
" You have heard of a certain Frank Churchill , I presume ," he continued -- " and know him to be my son , though he does not bear my name ."
My courage rises while I write .
" Oh !
All that were good would be withdrawn ; and if to these losses , the loss of Donwell were to be added , what would remain of cheerful or of rational society within their reach ?
" Agreed , agreed .
In spite of the answer , therefore , she ordered the carriage , and drove to Mrs . Bates ' s , in the hope that Jane would be induced to join her -- but it would not do ;-- Miss Bates came to the carriage door , all gratitude , and agreeing with her most earnestly in thinking an airing might be of the greatest service -- and every thing that message could do was tried -- but all in vain .
Should not you , Mr .
These difficulties , indeed , with a heart so alienated from Lucy , might not press very hard upon his patience ; but melancholy was the state of the person by whom the expectation of family opposition and unkindness , could be felt as a relief !
" Oh ," cried Miss Steele , looking significantly round at them , " I dare say Lucy ' s beau is quite as modest and pretty behaved as Miss Dashwood ' s ."
" Why , to be sure ," said Mr . Woodhouse --" yes , certainly -- I cannot deny that Mrs . Weston , poor Mrs . Weston , does come and see us pretty often -- but then -- she is always obliged to go away again ."
This was gaining something , something to look forward to .
Mr . Knightley had another reason for avoiding a table in the shade .
If you were to see them at the altar , you would suppose they were going to be married .
You need not tell me that you had a pleasant evening .
Mr . Elton ' s engagement had been the cure of the agitation of meeting Mr . Martin .
You must be a great deal too happy to care for Uppercross , which , as you well know , affords little to write about .
your sister - in - law ' s brother , Miss Dashwood ?
If her sisters intended to walk on the downs , she directly stole away towards the lanes ; if they talked of the valley , she was as speedy in climbing the hills , and could never be found when the others set off .
In the meanwhile the lame horse recovered so fast , that the party to Box Hill was again under happy consideration ; and at last Donwell was settled for one day , and Box Hill for the next ,-- the weather appearing exactly right .
Some doubts always lingered in her mind when they parted , which could only be removed by another half hour ' s discourse with himself .
It was natural to have some civil hopes on the subject , and he said ,
He did not advance a word of praise beyond what she knew to be thoroughly deserved by Mrs . Weston ; but , undoubtedly he could know very little of the matter .
What has he to do with books ?
Sir Walter seemed to admit it as complete apology ; and though Elizabeth could not see the circumstance in quite so favourable a light , she allowed it be a great extenuation .
CHAPTER XII
His sanguine temper , and fearlessness of mind , operated very differently on her .
Such another scheme , composed of so many ill - assorted people , she hoped never to be betrayed into again .
Little Emma , grow up a better woman than your aunt .
One thing , especially , I remember , because it served to identify the man still more :-- as soon as the ceremony was over , they were to go to Combe Magna , his seat in Somersetshire .
He had a very fine flock , and , while she was with them , he had been bid more for his wool than any body in the country .
She disliked Bath , and did not think it agreed with her ; and Bath was to be her home .
Frank Churchill ' s little inclination to exclude himself increased so much , that his last words to Emma were ,
But so it was .
You must not confound my meaning .
Mrs . Weston was most comfortably pleased on the occasion .
Most comfortable carriage .-- Oh !
exclaimed Emma .
The party at the Great House was sometimes increased by other company .
While poor Mrs . Churchill lived , I suppose there could not have been a hope , a chance , a possibility ;-- but scarcely are her remains at rest in the family vault , than her husband is persuaded to act exactly opposite to what she would have required .
It was all general approbation and smoothness ; nothing delineated or distinguished .
" I am ," said he .
" Yes ."
We seemed to understand each other .
Their presence always gave her pain , and she hardly knew how to make a very gracious return to the overpowering delight of Lucy in finding her STILL in town .
" What !"
do not imagine that I expect an account of Miss Fairfax ' s sensations from you , or from any body else .
He stopped .-- Emma dared not attempt any immediate reply .
" If I am not deceived by the uncertainty , the partiality of tender recollection , there is a very strong resemblance between them , as well in mind as person .
You saw I did not all dinner time .
" If Elinor is frightened away by her dislike of Mrs . Jennings ," said Marianne , " at least it need not prevent MY accepting her invitation .
But she was a very good woman , and if her second object was to be sensible and well - judging , her first was to see Anne happy .
They are parting ; they are shaking hands .
They have no mercy on her ."
It was now her darling object .
yes , quite indispensable ."
Exactly so .
Elinor kept her concern and her censure to herself ; and was very thankful that Marianne was not present , to share the provocation .
You might , some time or other , be differently affected towards him .
" This is very unfortunate .
I never met with her equal .
And the bell was rung , and the carriages spoken for .
According to Miss Bates -- it all came from her -- Mrs . Dixon had written most pressingly .
The plan had reached this point , when Anne , coming quietly down from Louisa ' s room , could not but hear what followed , for the parlour door was open .
" No sister ," cried Lucy , " you are mistaken there , our favourite beaux are NOT great coxcombs ."
His concern however was very apparent ; and after expressing it with earnestness , he added , in the same low voice ,--" But , Marianne , the horse is still yours , though you cannot use it now .
She had taken up the idea , she supposed , and made every thing bend to it .
-- Bad enough as it is , for I absolutely neglect them both to an unpardonable degree .-- I believe I have not played a bar this fortnight .-- However , he is coming , I assure you : yes , indeed , on purpose to wait on you all ."
And I will own to you , ( I am sure it will be safe ), that so far as our living with Mr . Churchill at Enscombe , it is settled .
Miss Woodhouse , what a pity that I must not write this beautiful charade into my book !
The carriage came : and Mr . Woodhouse , always the first object on such occasions , was carefully attended to his own by Mr . Knightley and Mr . Weston ; but not all that either could say could prevent some renewal of alarm at the sight of the snow which had actually fallen , and the discovery of a much darker night than he had been prepared for .
It was a bad business .
" Are you ill , Miss Dashwood ?-- you seem low -- you don ' t speak ;-- sure you an ' t well ."
I am sure we do .
Mr . Woodhouse could not be soon reconciled ; but the worst was overcome , the idea was given ; time and continual repetition must do the rest .-- To Emma ' s entreaties and assurances succeeded Mr . Knightley ' s , whose fond praise of her gave the subject even a kind of welcome ; and he was soon used to be talked to by each , on every fair occasion .-- They had all the assistance which Isabella could give , by letters of the strongest approbation ; and Mrs . Weston was ready , on the first meeting , to consider the subject in the most serviceable light -- first , as a settled , and , secondly , as a good one -- well aware of the nearly equal importance of the two recommendations to Mr . Woodhouse ' s mind .-- It was agreed upon , as what was to be ; and every body by whom he was used to be guided assuring him that it would be for his happiness ; and having some feelings himself which almost admitted it , he began to think that some time or other -- in another year or two , perhaps -- it might not be so very bad if the marriage did take place .
Mr . Perry is extremely concerned when any of us are ill .
From that moment , Emma could have taken her oath that Mr . Knightley had had no concern in giving the instrument .
" But ," continued Anne , presently , " though there is no truth in my having this claim on Mr Elliot , I should be extremely happy to be of use to you in any way that I could .
She had the remembrance of all this , she had the consciousness of being nine - and - twenty to give her some regrets and some apprehensions ; she was fully satisfied of being still quite as handsome as ever , but she felt her approach to the years of danger , and would have rejoiced to be certain of being properly solicited by baronet - blood within the next twelvemonth or two .
on Tuesday night , he made a very awkward sort of excuse ; ` he never shot ' and he had ` been quite misunderstood ,' and he had promised this and he had promised that , and the end of it was , I found , that he did not mean to come .
Surprise was the strongest emotion raised by their appearance ; but Anne was really glad to see them ; and the others were not so sorry but that they could put on a decent air of welcome ; and as soon as it became clear that these , their nearest relations , were not arrived with an views of accommodation in that house , Sir Walter and Elizabeth were able to rise in cordiality , and do the honours of it very well .
She had an unhappy state of health in general for the child of such a man , for she hardly knew what indisposition was ; and if he did not invent illnesses for her , she could make no figure in a message .
" Not quite , a few lines more .
Oh no !
No , he had already done that , which no man who CAN feel for another would do .
" Are you serious ?"
But I should like to know why , at that time of his life , he should slight my father ' s acquaintance as he did .
" From the very circumstance of its being larger , sir .
Marianne ' s illness , though weakening in its kind , had not been long enough to make her recovery slow ; and with youth , natural strength , and her mother ' s presence in aid , it proceeded so smoothly as to enable her to remove , within four days after the arrival of the latter , into Mrs . Palmer ' s dressing - room .
" I have never yet known what it was to separate esteem and love ."
She had thought only of avoiding Captain Wentworth ; but an escape from being appealed to as umpire was now added to the advantages of a quiet evening .
They have brought the whole coach full of playthings for the children .
He never tells me any thing !
You could not give me a greater reproof for the mistake I fell into .
I am sure , for my part , I should never have known he DID like it better than any other colour , if he had not happened to say so .
But I will not suppose this possible , and I hope very soon to receive your personal assurance of its being otherwise .
I beg your pardon , sir .
He had expressed himself as to coming , with more than common certainty .
" Well , he is coming , you see ; good news , I think .
I wish you would try to understand what an amiable young man may be likely to feel in directly opposing those , whom as child and boy he has been looking up to all his life ."
The Crofts were to have possession at Michaelmas ; and as Sir Walter proposed removing to Bath in the course of the preceding month , there was no time to be lost in making every dependent arrangement .
By which the Colonel was surprised to find that SHE was considering Mr . Ferrars ' s marriage as the certain consequence of the presentation ; for he did not suppose it possible that Delaford living could supply such an income , as anybody in his style of life would venture to settle on -- and he said so .
It will certainly be much the best way .
replied the happily deceived aunt , while eagerly hunting for the letter .--" Oh !
" Good heavens !"
" I do not offer it for Miss Smith ' s collection ," said he .
But the feelings of her sister were instantly expressed .
" Why so ?-- we were all his friends , and Lucy has been the longest known to him of any .
In one thing , however , she was uniform , when it came to the point , in avoiding , where it was possible , the presence of Mrs . Jennings , and in a determined silence when obliged to endure it .
Now , however , his good - natured , honest , stupid soul , full of indignation against me , and concern for your sister , could not resist the temptation of telling me what he knew ought to -- though probably he did not think it WOULD -- vex me horridly .
She is not to pay for the offence of others , by being held below the level of those with whom she is brought up .-- There can scarcely be a doubt that her father is a gentleman -- and a gentleman of fortune .-- Her allowance is very liberal ; nothing has ever been grudged for her improvement or comfort .-- That she is a gentleman ' s daughter , is indubitable to me ; that she associates with gentlemen ' s daughters , no one , I apprehend , will deny .-- She is superior to Mr . Robert Martin ."
He said much of his earnest desire of their living in the most sociable terms with his family , and pressed them so cordially to dine at Barton Park every day till they were better settled at home , that , though his entreaties were carried to a point of perseverance beyond civility , they could not give offence .
This gallant young man , who seemed to love without feeling , and to recommend himself without complaisance , directly handed over the word to Miss Fairfax , and with a particular degree of sedate civility entreated her to study it .
" It is impossible for me to doubt any longer .
His expensiveness is acknowledged even by himself , and his whole conduct declares that self - denial is a word hardly understood by him .
They are gone back to Kellynch , and almost made me swear to visit them this summer ; but my first visit to Kellynch will be with a surveyor , to tell me how to bring it with best advantage to the hammer .
And in return for an acknowledgment , which must give me some pain , you cannot deny me the privilege of disliking him as much as ever ."
The Middletons and Palmers -- how am I to bear their pity ?
Cleveland was a spacious , modern - built house , situated on a sloping lawn .
" You will make my excuses , my dear , as civilly as possible .
I have not seen a creature the whole morning !"
.
" How surprised you will be , Willoughby , on receiving this ; and I think you will feel something more than surprise , when you know that I am in town .
Harriet was to sit again the next day ; and Mr . Elton , just as he ought , entreated for the permission of attending and reading to them again .
So far went his understanding ; and his vanity supplied a little additional soothing , in the Admiral ' s situation in life , which was just high enough , and not too high .
Mr Elliot was too generally agreeable .
He wishes his boys to be active and hardy ; and if they misbehave , can give them a sharp word now and then ; but he is an affectionate father -- certainly Mr . John Knightley is an affectionate father .
You would be surprised to hear how often I watched you , how often I was on the point of falling in with you .
go to - day , go to - day .
It was all right , all open , all equal .
A good place is not it ?
" No , indeed ," cried Emma , most happy to begin , " not in the least .
It was felt as such things must be felt .
A beloved home made over to others ; all the precious rooms and furniture , groves , and prospects , beginning to own other eyes and other limbs !
To see Marianne , I felt , would be dreadful , and I even doubted whether I could see her again , and keep to my resolution .
" But really , I am half ashamed , and wish I had never taken up the idea ."
Mrs . Dashwood seemed actually working for her , herself ; cherishing all her hopes , and promoting all her views !
A narrow passage led directly through the house into the garden behind .
Your father and mother seem so totally free from all those ambitious feelings which have led to so much misconduct and misery , both in young and old .
The chances are that she must be a gainer ."
You need not tell her so , but I thought her dress hideous the other night .
We will not say how near , for fear of shocking the young ladies ."
" She sees nothing to blame in it ," replied Anne ; " on the contrary , she approves it , and has generally taken me when I have called on Mrs Smith .
I heard from him just before I left Exeter ;" taking a letter from her pocket and carelessly showing the direction to Elinor .
Now I am secure of you for ever ."
He was either less disposed for it than Charles had imagined , or he was too shy ; and after giving him a week ' s indulgence , Lady Russell determined him to be unworthy of the interest which he had been beginning to excite .
He seemed to be almost asking her , whether her affections were engaged .-- But as soon as she ( Miss Woodhouse ) appeared likely to join them , he changed the subject , and began talking about farming :-- The second , was his having sat talking with her nearly half an hour before Emma came back from her visit , the very last morning of his being at Hartfield -- though , when he first came in , he had said that he could not stay five minutes -- and his having told her , during their conversation , that though he must go to London , it was very much against his inclination that he left home at all , which was much more ( as Emma felt ) than he had acknowledged to _her_ .
She had weathered it , however , and could truly say that it had done her good .
" Oh !
" And if I did , ( which , however , I am far from allowing ) I should not feel that I had done wrong .
Marianne slept through every blast ; and the travellers -- they had a rich reward in store , for every present inconvenience .
Marianne , to the surprise of her sister , determined on dining with them .
In a short time Elinor saw Willoughby quit the room by the door towards the staircase , and telling Marianne that he was gone , urged the impossibility of speaking to him again that evening , as a fresh argument for her to be calm .
The evening passed off in the equal indulgence of feeling .
You see he cannot put the card out of his hand ."
He was a great deal too full of the market to think of any thing else -- which is just as it should be , for a thriving man .
I have not had a creature call on me since the second week in January , except Charles Hayter , who had been calling much oftener than was welcome .
Few people who have so compassionate a heart !
Wax - candles in the schoolroom !
It would be needless to say , that the gentlemen advanced in the good opinion of each other , as they advanced in each other ' s acquaintance , for it could not be otherwise .
Their last meeting had been most important in opening his feelings ; she had derived from it a delightful conviction ; but she feared from his looks , that the same unfortunate persuasion , which had hastened him away from the Concert Room , still governed .
As dinner was not to be ready in less than two hours from their arrival , Elinor determined to employ the interval in writing to her mother , and sat down for that purpose .
In Edward -- she knew not what she saw , nor what she wished to see ;-- happy or unhappy ,-- nothing pleased her ; she turned away her head from every sketch of him .
We none of us expect to be in smooth water all our days ."
Fortunately for those who pay their court through such foibles , a fond mother , though , in pursuit of praise for her children , the most rapacious of human beings , is likewise the most credulous ; her demands are exorbitant ; but she will swallow any thing ; and the excessive affection and endurance of the Miss Steeles towards her offspring were viewed therefore by Lady Middleton without the smallest surprise or distrust .
Chapter 24
In such moments Anne had no power of saying to herself , " These rooms ought to belong only to us .
Elinor ' s astonishment at this commission could hardly have been greater , had the Colonel been really making her an offer of his hand .
And upon looking over his letters and things , she found it was so , and is perfectly sure that this must be the very man , and her head is quite full of it , and of poor Richard !
Mrs . Dashwood , who did not chuse to dine with them oftener than they dined at the cottage , absolutely refused on her own account ; her daughters might do as they pleased .
Emma smiled and chatted as cheerfully as she could , to keep him from such thoughts ; but when tea came , it was impossible for him not to say exactly as he had said at dinner ,
A little upstart , vulgar being , with her Mr . E ., and her _caro_ _sposo_ , and her resources , and all her airs of pert pretension and underbred finery .
" What news do you mean ?"
what do you mean ?-- Mistake you !-- Am I to suppose then ?--"
" Very well -- and for the next presentation to a living of that value -- supposing the late incumbent to have been old and sickly , and likely to vacate it soon -- he might have got I dare say -- fourteen hundred pounds .
Very unfeeling !
I thought so at the time ; but you WOULD give him Cowper ."
Knightley .'
They might be more safely held up as a pattern .
I left her this morning with her lawyer , talking over the business ."
" She must have some motive , more powerful than appears , for refusing this invitation ," was Emma ' s conclusion .
You tell me that she has forgiven me already .
Her mind was quite sick of Mr . Elton and the Martins .
It need not detain us long .
" There is so pointed , and so particular a meaning in this compliment ," said she , " that I cannot have a doubt as to Mr . Elton ' s intentions .
Emma longed to know what Frank ' s first opinion of Mrs . Elton might be ; how he was affected by the studied elegance of her dress , and her smiles of graciousness .
She is his principal correspondent , I assure you .
cried Elizabeth , " I have been rather too much used to the game to be soon overcome by a gentleman ' s hints .
Besides the Eltons , it must be the Westons and Mr . Knightley ; so far it was all of course -- and it was hardly less inevitable that poor little Harriet must be asked to make the eighth :-- but this invitation was not given with equal satisfaction , and on many accounts Emma was particularly pleased by Harriet ' s begging to be allowed to decline it .
" Aye , very true , my dear ," cried the latter , though Jane had not spoken a word --" I was just going to say the same thing .
" Not so , indeed ; for , seriously speaking , I am very sure that conscience only kept Edward from Harley Street .
The strength , resolution , and presence of mind of the Mr . Knightleys , commanded his fullest dependence .
" And then their uncle comes in , and tosses them up to the ceiling in a very frightful way !"
If she does wrong , she ought to feel it ."
Every thing turns out for his good .-- He meets with a young woman at a watering - place , gains her affection , cannot even weary her by negligent treatment -- and had he and all his family sought round the world for a perfect wife for him , they could not have found her superior .-- His aunt is in the way .-- His aunt dies .-- He has only to speak .-- His friends are eager to promote his happiness .-- He had used every body ill -- and they are all delighted to forgive him .-- He is a fortunate man indeed !"
Nothing but such a persuasion could have prevented his putting an end to an engagement , which , long before the discovery of it laid him open to his mother ' s anger , had been a continual source of disquiet and regret to him .
" Oh !
I see nobody else looking like her !-- I must go and ask her whether it is an Irish fashion .
She remembered too , her own surprise at the time , at his mentioning nothing farther of those friends , at his total silence with respect even to their names .
" Oh !
Do you think him so very plain ?"
" _My_ report from Mrs . Goddard ' s ," said she presently , " was not so pleasant as I had hoped --` Not better ' was _my_ answer ."
You like news -- and I heard an article in my way hither that I think will interest you ."
In spite of all her faults , she knew she was dear to him ; might she not say , very dear ?-- When the suggestions of hope , however , which must follow here , presented themselves , she could not presume to indulge them .
Mrs . Elton ' s invitations I should have imagined any thing but inviting ."
-- Three girls , the two eldest sixteen and fourteen , was an awful legacy for a mother to bequeath , an awful charge rather , to confide to the authority and guidance of a conceited , silly father .
Mr Elliot , too , it must be remembered , had not been a widower seven months .
A few months had seen the beginning and the end of their acquaintance ; but not with a few months ended Anne ' s share of suffering from it .
Five couple are nothing , when one thinks seriously about it .
cried Anne eagerly , " I hope I do justice to all that is felt by you , and by those who resemble you .
Mr Shepherd was eloquent on the subject ; pointing out all the circumstances of the Admiral ' s family , which made him peculiarly desirable as a tenant .
cried Elinor .
She had no child to connect her with life and happiness again , no relations to assist in the arrangement of perplexed affairs , no health to make all the rest supportable .
I condition for nothing else ; but without music , life would be a blank to me .'"
Just like her !
From Willoughby their expression was at first held back , by the embarrassment which the remembrance of his assistance created .
" All this ," thought Elinor , " is very pretty ; but it can impose upon neither of us ."
that is quite -- I suppose there never was a piece of news more generally interesting .
He seemed really anxious to accommodate them and the whole of his letter was written in so friendly a style as could not fail of giving pleasure to his cousin ; more especially at a moment when she was suffering under the cold and unfeeling behaviour of her nearer connections .
It was three weeks since she had heard at all .
What !
She is fastidious .
she cried , satisfied to have no one preferred to herself .--" You are a humourist , and may say what you like .
But James will not like to put the horses to for such a little way ;-- and where are the poor horses to be while we are paying our visit ?"
" Oh !
Though nothing could be more polite than Lady Middleton ' s behaviour to Elinor and Marianne , she did not really like them at all .
CHAPTER 4
They were both silent for a few moments .
" She thinks herself wrong , then , for having consented to a private engagement ?"
" So do I ," said Mrs . Weston gently , " very much ."
She had much to recover from , before she could move .
" I wish I had any name but Elliot .
Edward said very little ; but what he did say , was in the most determined manner .
But all these things took up a great deal of time ."
Some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from motives of interest , for Edward Ferrars was the eldest son of a man who had died very rich ; and some might have repressed it from motives of prudence , for , except a trifling sum , the whole of his fortune depended on the will of his mother .
And so you must judge for yourself , whether it would be better for you to go about the house or not ."
We were within a few hours of eloping together for Scotland .
" We thought you were to bring them ."
said Lady Dalrymple .
" You will not find anything very agreeable in him , I assure you , ma ' am .
His setting off in such a hurry seems very like it .
Mrs . Jennings , perhaps satisfied with the partial justification of her forebodings which had been found in their late alarm , allowed herself to trust in his judgment , and admitted , with unfeigned joy , and soon with unequivocal cheerfulness , the probability of an entire recovery .
I lived in perpetual fright at that time , and had all manner of imaginary complaints from not knowing what to do with myself , or when I should hear from him next ; but as long as we could be together , nothing ever ailed me , and I never met with the smallest inconvenience ."
" I am afraid ," replied Elinor , " that the pleasantness of an employment does not always evince its propriety ."
But it is not in my power to delay my journey for one day !"
She would not , upon any account , mention her having met with him the second time ; luckily Mary did not much attend to their having passed close by him in their earlier walk , but she would have felt quite ill - used by Anne ' s having actually run against him in the passage , and received his very polite excuses , while she had never been near him at all ; no , that cousinly little interview must remain a perfect secret .
Oh , how fallen in their destination !
I do not mean to talk to you of what my feelings have been for him , but what they are NOW .-- At present , if I could be satisfied on one point , if I could be allowed to think that he was not ALWAYS acting a part , not ALWAYS deceiving me ;-- but above all , if I could be assured that he never was so VERY wicked as my fears have sometimes fancied him , since the story of that unfortunate girl "--
Mr . Knightley connected it with the dream ; but how it could all be , was beyond his comprehension .
He had always been lucky ; he knew he should be so still .
Their taste was strikingly alike .
" I dare say they are , sir .
It had been a very happy fortnight , and forlorn must be the sinking from it into the common course of Hartfield days .
I was fatigued .
Mr . Elton was speaking with animation , Harriet listening with a very pleased attention ; and Emma , having sent the child on , was beginning to think how she might draw back a little more , when they both looked around , and she was obliged to join them .
" I am perfectly satisfied of both ."
I observed no one in particular ."
She had hoped for an answer here -- for a few words to say that her conduct was at least intelligible ; but he was silent ; and , as far as she could judge , deep in thought .
Are you quite sure that you understand the terms on which Mr . Martin and Harriet now are ?"
" No , I cannot go to Cleveland ."
" My dear , you said that Miss Campbell would not allow him to be plain , and that you yourself --"
CHAPTER II
` I will not say , that since I entered into the engagement I have not had some happy moments ; but I can say , that I have never known the blessing of one tranquil hour :'-- and the quivering lip , Emma , which uttered it , was an attestation that I felt at my heart ."
" Marianne , may I ask -?"
He had nothing to urge against it , but still resisted the idea of a letter of proper submission ; and therefore , to make it easier to him , as he declared a much greater willingness to make mean concessions by word of mouth than on paper , it was resolved that , instead of writing to Fanny , he should go to London , and personally intreat her good offices in his favour .-- " And if they really DO interest themselves ," said Marianne , in her new character of candour , " in bringing about a reconciliation , I shall think that even John and Fanny are not entirely without merit ."
He was steady , observant , moderate , candid ; never run away with by spirits or by selfishness , which fancied itself strong feeling ; and yet , with a sensibility to what was amiable and lovely , and a value for all the felicities of domestic life , which characters of fancied enthusiasm and violent agitation seldom really possess .
She did her best when thus called on , by speaking of Lady Middleton with more warmth than she felt , though with far less than Miss Lucy .
-- repeated Mr .
His countenance was thoroughly good - humoured ; and his manners were as friendly as the style of his letter .
She wanted it to be prescribed , and felt as a duty .
and she sits so upright !
The whole of Lucy ' s behaviour in the affair , and the prosperity which crowned it , therefore , may be held forth as a most encouraging instance of what an earnest , an unceasing attention to self - interest , however its progress may be apparently obstructed , will do in securing every advantage of fortune , with no other sacrifice than that of time and conscience .
Emma restrained her indignation , and only turned from her in silence .
You do it very ill . Jane Fairfax mistress of the Abbey !-- Oh !
There is to be no form or parade -- a sort of gipsy party .
And your brother and sister were not very kind !
All that sounded extravagant or irrational in the progress of the reconciliation might have no origin but in the language of the relators .
I never saw such a likeness ."
Harriet submitted , though her mind could hardly separate the parts , so as to feel quite sure that her friend were not writing down a declaration of love .
" What felicity it is to hear a tune again which _has_ made one happy !-- If I mistake not that was danced at Weymouth ."
The possibility of Colonel Brandon ' s arriving and finding her there , came across her .
You must , indeed , you must ."
To - night we may have the pleasure of all meeting again at your party ," ( turning to Anne .)
She bitterly regretted not having sought a closer acquaintance with her , and blushed for the envious feelings which had certainly been , in some measure , the cause .
I think Harriet is doing extremely well .
She saw how her own character was considered by Captain Wentworth , and there had been just that degree of feeling and curiosity about her in his manner which must give her extreme agitation .
" That I can easily believe ."
Then , forgetting to think of it , she was at the other end of the room , beautifying a nosegay ; then , she ate her cold meat ; and then she was well enough to propose a little walk .
exclaimed Mrs Clay , lifting her hands and eyes , and sinking all the rest of her astonishment in a convenient silence .
" Oh !
if you have not got your spotted muslin on !-- I wonder you was not afraid of its being torn ."
Your sisters will marry , and it will be gone for ever .
Mrs Smith made no reply ; but when she was leaving her said , and with an expression half serious , half arch , " Well , I heartily wish your concert may answer ; and do not fail me to - morrow if you can come ; for I begin to have a foreboding that I may not have many more visits from you ."
They had a concert bill between them .
" She should always send for Perry , if the child appeared in the slightest degree disordered , were it only for a moment .
" Is not this most vexations , Knightley ?"
Mr Elliot was there ; she avoided , but she could pity him .
A circumstance rather unlucky occurred .
" The worst is over !"
She restrained herself , however , from any of the reproofs she could have given , and only thanked Mrs . Elton coolly ; " but their going to Bath was quite out of the question ; and she was not perfectly convinced that the place might suit her better than her father ."
He was too angry to say another word ; her manner too decided to invite supplication ; and in this state of swelling resentment , and mutually deep mortification , they had to continue together a few minutes longer , for the fears of Mr . Woodhouse had confined them to a foot - pace .
" I was simple enough to think , that because my FAITH was plighted to another , there could be no danger in my being with you ; and that the consciousness of my engagement was to keep my heart as safe and sacred as my honour .
His temper might perhaps be a little soured by finding , like many others of his sex , that through some unaccountable bias in favour of beauty , he was the husband of a very silly woman ,-- but she knew that this kind of blunder was too common for any sensible man to be lastingly hurt by it .-- It was rather a wish of distinction , she believed , which produced his contemptuous treatment of every body , and his general abuse of every thing before him .
Mr . Dashwood ' s strains were more solemn .
Louisa had fine naval fervour to begin with , and they would soon grow more alike .
" It is not worth while , Harriet , to give Mrs . Ford the trouble of two parcels ."
" I must not hope to be ever situated as you are , in the midst of every dearest connexion , and therefore I cannot expect that simply growing older should make me indifferent about letters ."
no , I am sure you are a great deal too kind to -- but if you would just advise me what I had best do -- No , no , I do not mean that -- As you say , one ' s mind ought to be quite made up -- One should not be hesitating -- It is a very serious thing .-- It will be safer to say ` No ,' perhaps .-- Do you think I had better say ` No ?'"
I had been unguarded .
She was in need of a little interval for recollection ."
Here is the rivet of your mistress ' s spectacles out .
" But , my dear sir , the difference of the journey ;-- only consider how great it would have been .-- An hundred miles , perhaps , instead of forty ."
You and Miss Fairfax gave us some very good music .
When she became sensible of this , it struck her that she could not be very much in love ; for in spite of her previous and fixed determination never to quit her father , never to marry , a strong attachment certainly must produce more of a struggle than she could foresee in her own feelings .
When Mr . Cole had moved away , and her attention could be restored as before , she saw Frank Churchill looking intently across the room at Miss Fairfax , who was sitting exactly opposite .
How , in all the peculiar disadvantages of their respective situations , would he ever learn of her real sentiments ?
" About eighteen hundred or two thousand a year ; not more than THAT ."
Of course , he cannot be aware of the importance to me .
This friend , and Sir Walter , did not marry , whatever might have been anticipated on that head by their acquaintance .
Nothing could have done it away to my feelings ."
We have now been here almost a fortnight , and yet he does not come .
Every thing that I have said or done , for many weeks past , has been with the sole view of marking my adoration of yourself .
There was one circumstance in the history of her grievances of particular irritation .
You do not think I could mean _you_ , or suppose Mr . Knightley to mean _you_ .
" He should be happy to see Mrs . Goddard .
The change which a few hours had wrought in the minds and the happiness of the Dashwoods , was such -- so great -- as promised them all , the satisfaction of a sleepless night .
The connection was certainly a respectable one , and probably gained her consideration among her friends ; and , if nothing more advantageous occurred , it would be better for her to marry YOU than be single ."
He said it , she knew , to be contradicted .
Mrs . Weston was disappointed .
But how shall I do ?
It was a great object with me at that time to be at sea ; a very great object , I wanted to be doing something ."
The time was coming when the news must spread farther , and other persons ' reception of it tried .
I never knew days fly so fast .
and resolved , that his mourning should be as handsome as possible ; and his wife sat sighing and moralising over her broad hems with a commiseration and good sense , true and steady .
That Marianne , fastidious as she was , thoroughly acquainted with Mrs . Jennings ' manners , and invariably disgusted by them , should overlook every inconvenience of that kind , should disregard whatever must be most wounding to her irritable feelings , in her pursuit of one object , was such a proof , so strong , so full , of the importance of that object to her , as Elinor , in spite of all that had passed , was not prepared to witness .
There were not merely no grammatical errors , but as a composition it would not have disgraced a gentleman ; the language , though plain , was strong and unaffected , and the sentiments it conveyed very much to the credit of the writer .
She was not in a humour , however , to regard it as an affront , and affecting to take no notice of what passed , by instantly talking of something else , she internally resolved henceforward to catch every opportunity of eyeing the hair and of satisfying herself , beyond all doubt , that it was exactly the shade of her own .
" How much they must enjoy it !
It was short , but expressed good sense , warm attachment , liberality , propriety , even delicacy of feeling .
Well , Miss Woodhouse , is he like what you expected ?
I am no dancer ."
She looked down very decidedly upon the Hayters , and thought it would be quite a misfortune to have the existing connection between the families renewed -- very sad for herself and her children .
" That ' s true ," she cried --" very true .
How do you like them ?"
You cannot doubt your sister ' s wishes .
They walked up stairs in to the drawing - room .-- Nobody was there .
No , she had heard from him very lately , but having answered the letter , had put it away .
The visit was paid , their acquaintance re - established , their interest in each other more than re - kindled .
I have often talked to her a good deal .
I dare say the Colonel will leave her all his fortune ."
A short account of myself , I believe , will be necessary , and it SHALL be a short one .
Emma called on her the next day , and found her doom already signed with regard to Randalls .
As the Miss Dashwoods entered the drawing - room of the park the next day , at one door , Mrs . Palmer came running in at the other , looking as good humoured and merry as before .
It might be a very indifferent piece of wit , but Emma found a great deal to laugh at and enjoy in it -- and so did Frank and Harriet .-- It did not seem to touch the rest of the party equally ; some looked very stupid about it , and Mr . Knightley gravely said ,
The name of Willoughby , John Willoughby , frequently repeated , first caught my attention ; and what followed was a positive assertion that every thing was now finally settled respecting his marriage with Miss Grey -- it was no longer to be a secret -- it would take place even within a few weeks , with many particulars of preparations and other matters .
They must retrench ; that did not admit of a doubt .
To be sitting long after dinner , was a confinement that he could not endure .
Her breath , her skin , her lips , all flattered Elinor with signs of amendment ; and Marianne fixed her eyes on her with a rational , though languid , gaze .
what a taking poor Mr . Edward will be in when he hears of it !
Oh , what would HE say to that !"
The like reserve prevailed on other topics .
I gave him a lock of my hair set in a ring when he was at Longstaple last , and that was some comfort to him , he said , but not equal to a picture .
" Oh !"
I am sure Miss Nash would -- for Miss Nash thinks her own sister very well married , and it is only a linen - draper ."
Mr . Knightley , however , shewed no triumphant happiness .
In person , she was inferior to both sisters , and had , even in her bloom , only reached the dignity of being " a fine girl ."
I am very little disposed to grant a tenant of Kellynch Hall any extraordinary favour , I assure you , be he sailor or soldier ."
CHAPTER VI
While you were at all in suspense I kept my feelings to myself , but now that you are so completely decided I have no hesitation in approving .
I meet them wherever I go ; and I declare , I never go twice into my nursery without seeing something of them .
Elizabeth was , in fact , revolving a great measure .
This topic was discussed very happily , and others succeeded of similar moment , and passed away with similar harmony ; but the evening did not close without a little return of agitation .
He could not be satisfied without a promise -- would not she give him her influence in procuring it ?"
" Ay , you may abuse me as you please ," said the good - natured old lady , " you have taken Charlotte off my hands , and cannot give her back again .
-- said she in a voice of great compassion to Marianne , who turned away her face without attempting to answer .
CHAPTER VII
She knows I would not offend for the world .
I perfectly remember it .-- Stop ; Mr . Knightley was standing just here , was not he ?
This was a pleasure which perhaps the whole day ' s visit might not afford , which certainly did not belong to the present half - hour ; but the very sight of Mrs . Weston , her smile , her touch , her voice was grateful to Emma , and she determined to think as little as possible of Mr . Elton ' s oddities , or of any thing else unpleasant , and enjoy all that was enjoyable to the utmost .
She had imagined such difficulties of fortune to exist there as must prevent the marriage from being near at hand ; but she learned from Charles that , very recently , ( since Mary ' s last letter to herself ), Charles Hayter had been applied to by a friend to hold a living for a youth who could not possibly claim it under many years ; and that on the strength of his present income , with almost a certainty of something more permanent long before the term in question , the two families had consented to the young people ' s wishes , and that their marriage was likely to take place in a few months , quite as soon as Louisa ' s .
The quarter of an hour brought her punctually to the white gate again ; and Miss Smith receiving her summons , was with her without delay , and unattended by any alarming young man .
And I must say that Lucy ' s crossness not to take them along with them in the chaise is worse than all .
Had he ever been in the way of learning , I think he would have drawn very well .
But the idea of any thing to be done in a _moment_ , was increasing , not lessening , Mr . Woodhouse ' s agitation .
" So I remember to have heard .
Poor Edward muttered something , but what it was , nobody knew , not even himself .
He had been thinking it over most deeply , most intently ; he had at first hoped to induce Mr . Woodhouse to remove with her to Donwell ; he had wanted to believe it feasible , but his knowledge of Mr . Woodhouse would not suffer him to deceive himself long ; and now he confessed his persuasion , that such a transplantation would be a risk of her father ' s comfort , perhaps even of his life , which must not be hazarded .
" Something that would do !"
On the morning appointed for Admiral and Mrs Croft ' s seeing Kellynch Hall , Anne found it most natural to take her almost daily walk to Lady Russell ' s , and keep out of the way till all was over ; when she found it most natural to be sorry that she had missed the opportunity of seeing them .
The ladies had passed near it in their way along the valley , but it was screened from their view at home by the projection of a hill .
They arrived in due time at the place of destination , and as soon as the string of carriages before them would allow , alighted , ascended the stairs , heard their names announced from one landing - place to another in an audible voice , and entered a room splendidly lit up , quite full of company , and insufferably hot .
Mr . John Knightley must be in town again on the 28th , and we ought to be thankful , papa , that we are to have the whole of the time they can give to the country , that two or three days are not to be taken out for the Abbey .
He really felt conscientiously vexed on the occasion ; for the very exertion to which he had limited the performance of his promise to his father was by this arrangement rendered impracticable .-- The furniture was all sent around by water .
As to myself , I am very sorry that you should have been giving way to any feelings -- Nothing could be farther from my wishes -- your attachment to my friend Harriet -- your pursuit of her , ( pursuit , it appeared ,) gave me great pleasure , and I have been very earnestly wishing you success : but had I supposed that she were not your attraction to Hartfield , I should certainly have thought you judged ill in making your visits so frequent .
-- The pertinacity of her friend seemed more than she could bear .
" Don ' t talk of it , don ' t talk of it ," he cried .
" Your word !-- why not your honour !-- why not say upon your honour , that it has nothing to do with any of them ?
Don ' t scruple .
Edward brought us a most charming account of the place : the most complete thing of its kind , he said , that ever was , and you all seemed to enjoy it beyond any thing .
From perfect misery to perfect happiness !"
The laurels at Maple Grove are in the same profusion as here , and stand very much in the same way -- just across the lawn ; and I had a glimpse of a fine large tree , with a bench round it , which put me so exactly in mind !
As soon as he could , he began to talk to her of Lyme , wanting to compare opinions respecting the place , but especially wanting to speak of the circumstance of their happening to be guests in the same inn at the same time ; to give his own route , understand something of hers , and regret that he should have lost such an opportunity of paying his respects to her .
Now was the time when her son - in - law ' s promise to his father might with particular propriety be fulfilled .
" I certainly will come .
" Nobody knew how much she should suffer .
" Ah !--( shaking his head )-- the uncertainty of when I may be able to return !-- I shall try for it with a zeal !-- It will be the object of all my thoughts and cares !-- and if my uncle and aunt go to town this spring -- but I am afraid -- they did not stir last spring -- I am afraid it is a custom gone for ever ."
" I have not even made any inquiry ; I do not wish to make any yet ."
The evil of the actual disparity in their ages ( and Mr . Woodhouse had not married early ) was much increased by his constitution and habits ; for having been a valetudinarian all his life , without activity of mind or body , he was a much older man in ways than in years ; and though everywhere beloved for the friendliness of his heart and his amiable temper , his talents could not have recommended him at any time .
I am sure she saw me , but she looked away directly , and took no notice ; and they both went to quite the farther end of the shop ; and I kept sitting near the door !-- Oh !
Anne went home to think over all that she had heard .
But I was willing to shew you that I had not forgot our old disputes ."
A warm climate may be prescribed for her .
Elinor , for her sister ' s sake , could not press the subject farther , and she hoped it was not required of her for Willoughby ' s ; since , though Marianne might lose much , he could gain very little by the enforcement of the real truth .
' I wish , with all my heart ,' says poor Fanny in her affectionate way , ' that we had asked your sisters instead of them .'"
It was badly done , indeed !
But poor Mrs . Bates had a bad cold about a month ago ."
Lady Russell , in spite of all her former transgressions , he could now value from his heart .
I assure you , Captain Wentworth , we are very sorry he ever left you ."
She is a flatterer in all her ways ; and so much the worse , because undesigned .
About the middle of the day , Mrs . Jennings went out by herself on business , and Elinor began her letter directly , while Marianne , too restless for employment , too anxious for conversation , walked from one window to the other , or sat down by the fire in melancholy meditation .
Her family had of late been exceedingly fluctuating .
He has seen a great deal of the world ; has been abroad , has read , and has a thinking mind .
Do not think yourself excused by any weakness , any natural defect of understanding on her side , in the wanton cruelty so evident on yours .
Emma was obliged to ask what they had told her , though fearful of its producing Mr . Elton .
How can you be so forgetful ?"
He is very far from being independent .
From this time the subject was never revived by Elinor , and when entered on by Lucy , who seldom missed an opportunity of introducing it , and was particularly careful to inform her confidante , of her happiness whenever she received a letter from Edward , it was treated by the former with calmness and caution , and dismissed as soon as civility would allow ; for she felt such conversations to be an indulgence which Lucy did not deserve , and which were dangerous to herself .
.
Mary had had her evils ; but upon the whole , as was evident by her staying so long , she had found more to enjoy than to suffer .
" to exemplify : a beautiful glossy nut , which , blessed with original strength , has outlived all the storms of autumn .
In this state Frank Churchill had found her , she trembling and conditioning , they loud and insolent .
No , no ; Henrietta might do worse than marry Charles Hayter ; and if she has him , and Louisa can get Captain Wentworth , I shall be very well satisfied ."
" But if you write a note to the housekeeper , Mr . Brandon ," said Marianne , eagerly , " will it not be sufficient ?"
He was afraid not even Miss Woodhouse "-- he stopt a moment --" or Miss Smith could inspire him ."
Thank God !
In that case , so liable as every body was to meet every body in Bath , Lady Russell would in all likelihood see him somewhere .
I am amused by one part of John ' s letter -- did you notice it ?-- where he says , that my information did not take him wholly by surprize , that he was rather in expectation of hearing something of the kind ."
It was soon generally agreed that Tuesday should be the day ; Charles only reserving the advantage of still teasing his wife , by persisting that he would go to the play to - morrow if nobody else would .
He thought she had undertaken more than she was equal to , and that she felt it so herself , though she would not own it .
" I want no proof of their affection ," said Elinor ; " but of their engagement I do ."
The private balls at the park then began ; and parties on the water were made and accomplished as often as a showery October would allow .
" I insist on you hearing the whole of it ," he replied , " My fortune was never large , and I had always been expensive , always in the habit of associating with people of better income than myself .
These were some of the thoughts which occupied Anne , while her fingers were mechanically at work , proceeding for half an hour together , equally without error , and without consciousness .
But you had better change your mind ."
Well , this Miss Louisa , we all thought , you know , was to marry Frederick .
She never mentioned it before , because she would not alarm us .
they will hear you ."
Marianne entered the house with a heart swelling with emotion from the consciousness of being only eighty miles from Barton , and not thirty from Combe Magna ; and before she had been five minutes within its walls , while the others were busily helping Charlotte to show her child to the housekeeper , she quitted it again , stealing away through the winding shrubberies , now just beginning to be in beauty , to gain a distant eminence ; where , from its Grecian temple , her eye , wandering over a wide tract of country to the south - east , could fondly rest on the farthest ridge of hills in the horizon , and fancy that from their summits Combe Magna might be seen .
We shall have no occasion to open the windows at all -- not once the whole evening ; and it is that dreadful habit of opening the windows , letting in cold air upon heated bodies , which ( as you well know , sir ) does the mischief ."
I assure you that nothing of the sort you are thinking of will be settled any week .
" Oh !
A Hartfield edition of Shakespeare would have a long note on that passage ."
For you alone , I think and plan .
He gave her a letter , it was from Frank , and to herself ; he had met with it in his way , and had taken the liberty of opening it .
There was no getting at her real opinion .
" From something that he said , my dear Emma , I rather imagine --"
But I have no right , and I could have no chance of succeeding .
When Emma afterwards heard that Jane Fairfax had been seen wandering about the meadows , at some distance from Highbury , on the afternoon of the very day on which she had , under the plea of being unequal to any exercise , so peremptorily refused to go out with her in the carriage , she could have no doubt -- putting every thing together -- that Jane was resolved to receive no kindness from _her_ .
" My father and Mrs . Weston are at the Crown at this moment ," said Frank Churchill , " examining the capabilities of the house .
by the bye ," then sinking his voice , and looking demure for the moment --" I hope Mr . Knightley is well ?"
This is the way in which I always consider the matter , and my mother is perfectly convinced of her error ."
Such a change !
My poor little girl would be sadly disappointed , I know , if the basket was not finished tomorrow , for though I told her it certainly would not , I am sure she depends upon having it done ."
No sooner was her answer dispatched , than Mrs . Dashwood indulged herself in the pleasure of announcing to her son - in - law and his wife that she was provided with a house , and should incommode them no longer than till every thing were ready for her inhabiting it .
It was a concern which brought just employment enough .
The third day succeeding their knowledge of the particulars , was so fine , so beautiful a Sunday as to draw many to Kensington Gardens , though it was only the second week in March .
It was natural for him to feel that he had _cause_ to sigh .
I do not reckon the Hayters as anybody .
I have had all my own little concerns to arrange , books and music to divide , and all my trunks to repack , from not having understood in time what was intended as to the waggons : and one thing I have had to do , Mary , of a more trying nature : going to almost every house in the parish , as a sort of take - leave .
To be sure , I may just as well go as not , for I am of no use at home -- am I ?
" I know that you all love her really too well to be unjust or unkind ; but excuse me , Mr . Knightley , if I take the liberty ( I consider myself , you know , as having somewhat of the privilege of speech that Emma ' s mother might have had ) the liberty of hinting that I do not think any possible good can arise from Harriet Smith ' s intimacy being made a matter of much discussion among you .
Even Emma grew tired at last of flattery and merriment , and wished herself rather walking quietly about with any of the others , or sitting almost alone , and quite unattended to , in tranquil observation of the beautiful views beneath her .
" It is so , indeed ," continued Mr . Knightley ; " I have it from Robert Martin himself .
Emma was extremely confused .
I shall leave off while I am well ."
" I think , indeed ," said John Knightley pleasantly , " that Mr . Weston has some little claim .
I say awakened , because time and London , business and dissipation , had in some measure quieted it , and I had been growing a fine hardened villain , fancying myself indifferent to her , and chusing to fancy that she too must have become indifferent to me ; talking to myself of our past attachment as a mere idle , trifling business , shrugging up my shoulders in proof of its being so , and silencing every reproach , overcoming every scruple , by secretly saying now and then , ' I shall be heartily glad to hear she is well married .'
That such letters , so full of affection and confidence , could have been so answered , Elinor , for Willoughby ' s sake , would have been unwilling to believe .
" Oh !
It did not accord with the rationality of plan , the moderation in expense , or even the unselfish warmth of heart , which she had believed herself to discern in him yesterday .
" Oh !
You will never go to Swisserland .
at present I ask no more ."
Mr . Weston , I dare say , has been telling you exactly how the matter stands ?"
" But perhaps the abuse of such people as yourself and Marianne will make amends for the regard of Lady Middleton and her mother .
The same story and the same raptures were repeated , when the two girls came with their father , through the gloom of the evening , to make enquiries ; and Mr Musgrove , no longer under the first uneasiness about his heir , could add his confirmation and praise , and hope there would be now no occasion for putting Captain Wentworth off , and only be sorry to think that the cottage party , probably , would not like to leave the little boy , to give him the meeting .
She had called on her former governess , and had heard from her of there being an old school - fellow in Bath , who had the two strong claims on her attention of past kindness and present suffering .
Colonel ," said she , with her usual noisy cheerfulness , " I am monstrous glad to see you -- sorry I could not come before -- beg your pardon , but I have been forced to look about me a little , and settle my matters ; for it is a long while since I have been at home , and you know one has always a world of little odd things to do after one has been away for any time ; and then I have had Cartwright to settle with -- Lord , I have been as busy as a bee ever since dinner !
" How sorry I am !
The two mothers , though each really convinced that her own son was the tallest , politely decided in favour of the other .
Elinor then ventured to doubt the propriety of her receiving such a present from a man so little , or at least so lately known to her .
I will answer for it _she_ never betrayed the least thing in the world .
She felt herself a most fortunate woman ; and she had lived long enough to know how fortunate she might well be thought , where the only regret was for a partial separation from friends whose friendship for her had never cooled , and who could ill bear to part with her .
The walking party had crossed the lane , and were surmounting an opposite stile , and the Admiral was putting his horse in motion again , when Captain Wentworth cleared the hedge in a moment to say something to his sister .
It was a sad event -- a great shock -- with all her faults , what would Mr . Churchill do without her ?
" You are mistaken , Elinor ," said she warmly , " in supposing I know very little of Willoughby .
It will not do to _invite_ five couple .
" Four months !-- Have you known of this four months ?"
I perfectly see how the hours passed : that you had always something agreeable to listen to .
she replied .
You had it from himself , had you ?"
In one moment such a change !
no ; there would be a Mrs . Knightley to throw cold water on every thing .-- Extremely disagreeable !
Human nature is so well disposed towards those who are in interesting situations , that a young person , who either marries or dies , is sure of being kindly spoken of .
After a pause of several minutes , their silence was broken , by his asking her in a voice of some agitation , when he was to congratulate her on the acquisition of a brother ?
If she had only made me a formal courtesy , for instance , without saying a word , and never after had took any notice of me , and never looked at me in a pleasant way -- you know what I mean -- if I had been treated in that forbidding sort of way , I should have gave it all up in despair .
" But the letter , Mr . Willoughby , your own letter ; have you any thing to say about that ?"
For then his brother ' s bow must have given the finishing stroke to what the ill - humour of his mother and sister would have begun .
They were more in love with him ; yet there it was not love .
This will not do .
She took the first opportunity of affronting her mother - in - law on the occasion , talking to her so expressively of her brother ' s great expectations , of Mrs . Ferrars ' s resolution that both her sons should marry well , and of the danger attending any young woman who attempted to DRAW HIM IN ; that Mrs . Dashwood could neither pretend to be unconscious , nor endeavor to be calm .
Her ignorance is hourly flattery .
Poor Mr . Edward !
Sir Walter , however , would choose his own means , and at last wrote a very fine letter of ample explanation , regret , and entreaty , to his right honourable cousin .
A gentleman carrying a gun , with two pointers playing round him , was passing up the hill and within a few yards of Marianne , when her accident happened .
I would lay fifty guineas the letter was of his own writing ."
" I should be puzzled to spend so large a fortune myself ," said Mrs . Dashwood , " if my children were all to be rich my help ."
Captain Wentworth was on the watch for them , and a chaise and four in waiting , stationed for their convenience in the lowest part of the street ; but his evident surprise and vexation at the substitution of one sister for the other , the change in his countenance , the astonishment , the expressions begun and suppressed , with which Charles was listened to , made but a mortifying reception of Anne ; or must at least convince her that she was valued only as she could be useful to Louisa .
It was evident that he was unhappy ; she wished it were equally evident that he still distinguished her by the same affection which once she had felt no doubt of inspiring ; but hitherto the continuance of his preference seemed very uncertain ; and the reservedness of his manner towards her contradicted one moment what a more animated look had intimated the preceding one .
And when I brought out the baked apples from the closet , and hoped our friends would be so very obliging as to take some , ` Oh !'
The force of habit was to be added ."
It was weather which might fairly confine every body at home ; and though she hoped and believed him to be really taking comfort in some society or other , it was very pleasant to have her father so well satisfied with his being all alone in his own house , too wise to stir out ; and to hear him say to Mr . Knightley , whom no weather could keep entirely from them ,--
" Proof indeed !"
You will not like staying late .
The servants , I suppose , forgot to tell you that Mr . Palmer was not in the house ."
Very odd !
Robert Martin would never have proceeded so far , if he had not felt persuaded of her not being disinclined to him .
He had been engaged to Captain Harville ' s sister , and was now mourning her loss .
But really , I could almost venture , if Harriet would sit to me .
I wish he may be induced to call here .
A three weeks ' residence at Delaford , where , in his evening hours at least , he had little to do but to calculate the disproportion between thirty - six and seventeen , brought him to Barton in a temper of mind which needed all the improvement in Marianne ' s looks , all the kindness of her welcome , and all the encouragement of her mother ' s language , to make it cheerful .
And , indeed , though my mother ' s eyes are not so good as they were , she can see amazingly well still , thank God !
On the present occasion , for the better entertainment of their visitor , towards whose amusement he felt himself bound to contribute , he wished to engage them for both .
The nature and the simplicity of gentlemen and ladies , with their servants and furniture , I think is best observed by meals within doors .
" Are you expecting Miss Fairfax here soon ?"
The advantage of the match I felt to be all on her side ; and had not the smallest doubt ( nor have I now ) that there would be a general cry - out upon her extreme good luck .
To me , she was in the place of a parent .
Could she be secure of that , indeed , of his never marrying at all , she believed she should be perfectly satisfied .-- Let him but continue the same Mr . Knightley to her and her father , the same Mr . Knightley to all the world ; let Donwell and Hartfield lose none of their precious intercourse of friendship and confidence , and her peace would be fully secured .-- Marriage , in fact , would not do for her .
CHAPTER I
" Mr . Knightley I declare !-- I must speak to him if possible , just to thank him .
Had he feigned a regard for her which he did not feel ?
He had just parted from my sister , had seen her leave him in the greatest affliction ; and if he felt obliged , from a fear of offending Mrs . Smith , to resist the temptation of returning here soon , and yet aware that by declining your invitation , by saying that he was going away for some time , he should seem to act an ungenerous , a suspicious part by our family , be might well be embarrassed and disturbed .
" My dear Mrs Smith , your authority is deficient .
Harriet may pick and chuse .
Your description of Mrs . Churchill made me think of them directly .
Whatever Marianne was desirous of , her mother would be eager to promote -- she could not expect to influence the latter to cautiousness of conduct in an affair respecting which she had never been able to inspire her with distrust ; and she dared not explain the motive of her own disinclination for going to London .
--" At a watering - place , or in a common London acquaintance , it was difficult to decide on such points .
Harriet , she found , had never in her life been within side the Vicarage , and her curiosity to see it was so extreme , that , considering exteriors and probabilities , Emma could only class it , as a proof of love , with Mr . Elton ' s seeing ready wit in her .
I grant you , that any of them but Charles would be a very shocking match for Henrietta , and indeed it could not be ; he is the only one that could be possible ; but he is a very good - natured , good sort of a fellow ; and whenever Winthrop comes into his hands , he will make a different sort of place of it , and live in a very different sort of way ; and with that property , he will never be a contemptible man -- good , freehold property .
he could ride to London at any time .
I was almost sure you would not leave London yet awhile ; though you TOLD me , you know , at Barton , that you should not stay above a MONTH .
Why did Mr Elliot draw back ?"
They afforded her no companion that could make amends for what she had left behind , nor that could teach her to think of Norland with less regret than ever .
" Oh !
" It is strange ," replied Elinor , in a most painful perplexity , " that I should never have heard him even mention your name ."
There could be no harm in a scheme , a mere passive scheme .
You would not wish to disappoint and mortify the Coles , I am sure , sir ; friendly , good sort of people as ever lived , and who have been your neighbours these _ten_ years ."
She read , and was surprized .
Still , however , though every thing had not been accomplished by her ingenious device , she could not but flatter herself that it had been the occasion of much present enjoyment to both , and must be leading them forward to the great event .
Harriet had been at Hartfield , as usual , soon after breakfast ; and , after a time , had gone home to return again to dinner : she returned , and sooner than had been talked of , and with an agitated , hurried look , announcing something extraordinary to have happened which she was longing to tell .
This proposal of his , this plan of marrying and continuing at Hartfield -- the more she contemplated it , the more pleasing it became .
Mrs . Jennings and Elinor were of the number ; but Marianne , who knew that the Willoughbys were again in town , and had a constant dread of meeting them , chose rather to stay at home , than venture into so public a place .
Besides , she is out of health now ; but _that_ indeed , by her own account , she has always been .
Not more than five couple could be mustered ; but the rarity and the suddenness of it made it very delightful , and she found herself well matched in a partner .
" Yes , very soon .
In the first place , I had a note from Mrs Croft yesterday , offering to convey anything to you ; a very kind , friendly note indeed , addressed to me , just as it ought ; I shall therefore be able to make my letter as long as I like .
Elinor ' s happiness was not so great .
This does not seem much like joy , indeed , in me --( twinkling away a tear or two )-- but it will be very trying for us to part with her , after having had her so long , and she has a dreadful headache just now , writing all the morning :-- such long letters , you know , to be written to Colonel Campbell , and Mrs . Dixon .
Elton was sitting here , I remember , much about where I am now ."
He sat really lost in thought for the first few minutes ; and when rousing himself , it was only to say ,
no wonder she has been looking so bad and so cast down this last week or two , for this matter I suppose has been hanging over her head as long as that .
Mrs . Weston was exceedingly disappointed -- much more disappointed , in fact , than her husband , though her dependence on seeing the young man had been so much more sober : but a sanguine temper , though for ever expecting more good than occurs , does not always pay for its hopes by any proportionate depression .
They burst on him , I do not know how , but by some letter or message -- and it was the discovery of what she was doing , of this very project of hers , which determined him to come forward at once , own it all to his uncle , throw himself on his kindness , and , in short , put an end to the miserable state of concealment that had been carrying on so long ."
Do not you remember what Mr . Perry said , so many years ago , when I had the measles ?
This is always the way with him !
" Westgate Buildings must have been rather surprised by the appearance of a carriage drawn up near its pavement ," observed Sir Walter .
Mr . and Mrs . Elton , indeed , shewed no unwillingness to mix , and be as agreeable as they could ; but during the two whole hours that were spent on the hill , there seemed a principle of separation , between the other parties , too strong for any fine prospects , or any cold collation , or any cheerful Mr . Weston , to remove .
He made no answer ; merely looked , and bowed in submission ; and soon afterwards said , in a lively tone ,
I shall write to Mrs . Partridge in a day or two , and shall give her a strict charge to be on the look - out for any thing eligible ."
She had spoken it ; but she trembled when it was done , conscious that her words were listened to , and daring not even to try to observe their effect .
I could very ill be spared -- but such a point had been made of my coming !
" To be sure ," said Harriet , in a mortified voice , " he is not so genteel as real gentlemen ."
" It is perfectly true .-- Colonel Brandon has given the living of Delaford to Edward ."
A small house in their own neighbourhood , where they might still have Lady Russell ' s society , still be near Mary , and still have the pleasure of sometimes seeing the lawns and groves of Kellynch , was the object of her ambition .
It would be a great disappointment to Mr . John Knightley ; consequently to Isabella .
I hope I can allow for him .
" Let us think of those among our absent friends who are more cheerfully employed ," cried Emma .
They had not intended to go over till the summer , but she is so impatient to see them again -- for till she married , last October , she was never away from them so much as a week , which must make it very strange to be in different kingdoms , I was going to say , but however different countries , and so she wrote a very urgent letter to her mother -- or her father , I declare I do not know which it was , but we shall see presently in Jane ' s letter -- wrote in Mr . Dixon ' s name as well as her own , to press their coming over directly , and they would give them the meeting in Dublin , and take them back to their country seat , Baly - craig , a beautiful place , I fancy .
I do not mean to say , however , that you might not have made discoveries ."
Jane has heard a great deal of its beauty ; from Mr . Dixon , I mean -- I do not know that she ever heard about it from any body else ; but it was very natural , you know , that he should like to speak of his own place while he was paying his addresses -- and as Jane used to be very often walking out with them -- for Colonel and Mrs . Campbell were very particular about their daughter ' s not walking out often with only Mr . Dixon , for which I do not at all blame them ; of course she heard every thing he might be telling Miss Campbell about his own home in Ireland ; and I think she wrote us word that he had shewn them some drawings of the place , views that he had taken himself .
If he would act in this sort of manner , on principle , consistently , regularly , their little minds would bend to his ."
It was engrossed by the extraordinary silence of her sister and Willoughby on the subject , which they must know to be peculiarly interesting to them all .
We must look for the change elsewhere ."
He almost wished she had been prevailed on to come home the day before ; but the truth was , that Mrs Harville left nothing for anybody to do ."
Chapter 2
" Yes -- it seems to depend upon nothing but the ill - humour of Mrs . Churchill , which I imagine to be the most certain thing in the world ."
He had spent his whole solitary evening in the room adjoining theirs ; had heard voices , mirth continually ; thought they must be a most delightful set of people , longed to be with them , but certainly without the smallest suspicion of his possessing the shadow of a right to introduce himself .
_She_ disapproved them , which ought to have been enough .-- My plea of concealing the truth she did not think sufficient .-- She was displeased ; I thought unreasonably so : I thought her , on a thousand occasions , unnecessarily scrupulous and cautious : I thought her even cold .
She was not thoroughly comfortable herself .
Bless me !
repeated Miss Steele ; " Mr . Ferrars is the happy man , is he ?
But , then , if Mrs . Dashwood should live fifteen years we shall be completely taken in ."
He was satisfied of there being no present danger in returning home , but no assurances could convince him that it was safe to stay ; and while the others were variously urging and recommending , Mr . Knightley and Emma settled it in a few brief sentences : thus --
that would be terrible , indeed ," said Miss Steele -- " Dear little soul , how I do love her !"
" And how does dear , dear Norland look ?"
In another day or two perhaps ; this extreme mildness can hardly last longer -- nay , perhaps it may freeze tonight !"
Perfect happiness , even in memory , is not common ; and there were two points on which she was not quite easy .
I suppose Lady Middleton won ' t ask us any more this bout .
Her youth had passed without distinction , and her middle of life was devoted to the care of a failing mother , and the endeavour to make a small income go as far as possible .
And so then , in my nonsense , I could not help making a treasure of it -- so I put it by never to be used , and looked at it now and then as a great treat ."
I must not quarrel with a spirit of forbearance which has been so richly extended towards myself ; but , otherwise , I should loudly protest against the share of it which that woman has known .-- ` Jane ,' indeed !-- You will observe that I have not yet indulged myself in calling her by that name , even to you .
said he at last .
He stopped at Highbury , at the Bates ' s , I fancy , some time -- and then came on hither ; but was in such a hurry to get back to his uncle , to whom he is just now more necessary than ever , that , as I tell you , he could stay with us but a quarter of an hour .-- He was very much agitated -- very much , indeed -- to a degree that made him appear quite a different creature from any thing I had ever seen him before .-- In addition to all the rest , there had been the shock of finding her so very unwell , which he had had no previous suspicion of -- and there was every appearance of his having been feeling a great deal ."
They had left Louisa beginning to sit up ; but her head , though clear , was exceedingly weak , and her nerves susceptible to the highest extreme of tenderness ; and though she might be pronounced to be altogether doing very well , it was still impossible to say when she might be able to bear the removal home ; and her father and mother , who must return in time to receive their younger children for the Christmas holidays , had hardly a hope of being allowed to bring her with them .
I thought I could not be so deceived ; but now , it is clear ; the state of his mind is as clear and decided , as my wishes on the subject have been ever since I knew you .
But , unfortunately -- in short , if your compassion does not stand my friend --"
And there , as they slowly paced the gradual ascent , heedless of every group around them , seeing neither sauntering politicians , bustling housekeepers , flirting girls , nor nursery - maids and children , they could indulge in those retrospections and acknowledgements , and especially in those explanations of what had directly preceded the present moment , which were so poignant and so ceaseless in interest .
He would gladly weaken , by any fair means , whatever feelings or speculations concerning him might exist ; and he went , therefore , to his brother ' s , meaning after a while to return to Kellynch , and act as circumstances might require .
I had reason to believe myself secure of my present wife , if I chose to address her , and I persuaded myself to think that nothing else in common prudence remained for me to do .
She heard it all under embellishment .
CHAPTER 42
" Did not you hear him complain of the rheumatism ?
And she talked in this way so long and successfully that , when forced to give her attention again to her father and sister , she had nothing worse to hear than Isabella ' s kind inquiry after Jane Fairfax ; and Jane Fairfax , though no great favourite with her in general , she was at that moment very happy to assist in praising .
for I think you have a little cold , and Patty has been washing the kitchen .'--` Oh !
He praised her for being without art or affectation , for having simple , honest , generous , feelings .-- She knew that he saw such recommendations in Harriet ; he had dwelt on them to her more than once .-- Much that lived in Harriet ' s memory , many little particulars of the notice she had received from him , a look , a speech , a removal from one chair to another , a compliment implied , a preference inferred , had been unnoticed , because unsuspected , by Emma .
" I think I have ," replied Elinor , with an exertion of spirits , which increased with her increase of emotion .
My only scruple in advising the match was on his account , as being beneath his deserts , and a bad connexion for him .
Ladies and gentlemen -- I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse to say , that she waives her right of knowing exactly what you may all be thinking of , and only requires something very entertaining from each of you , in a general way .
The gardens and shrubberies would be kept in almost as high order as they are now .
A sudden recollection seemed to occur , and to give him some taste of that emotion which was reddening Anne ' s cheeks and fixing her eyes on the ground .
Colonel Wallis had known Mr Elliot long , had been well acquainted also with his wife , had perfectly understood the whole story .
A sudden freak seemed to have seized him at breakfast , and he had sent for a chaise and set off , intending to return to dinner , but with no more important view that appeared than having his hair cut .
Elinor , distressed by this charge of reserve in herself , which she was not at liberty to do away , knew not how , under such circumstances , to press for greater openness in Marianne .
It does not bear talking of ."
She loved the child , and had always kept it with her .
" Yes ; but we must not rest our claims on that distinction .
Elton !"
Many a noble fortune has been made during the war .
I treat you without ceremony , Mr . Knightley .
The ball proceeded pleasantly .
It had then seemed the object nearest her heart , that Dr Shirley , the rector , who for more than forty years had been zealously discharging all the duties of his office , but was now growing too infirm for many of them , should be quite fixed on engaging a curate ; should make his curacy quite as good as he could afford , and should give Charles Hayter the promise of it .
When we talked about him , it was as clear as possible ."
We shall be most happy to consider you as one of the party ."
" I was not at all aware of this .
Marianne was in a silent agony , too much oppressed even for tears ; but as Mrs . Jennings was luckily not come home , they could go directly to their own room , where hartshorn restored her a little to herself .
" My love ," said her mother , " you must not be offended with Elinor -- she was only in jest .
Marianne severely censured herself for what she had said ; but her own forgiveness might have been more speedy , had she known how little offence it had given her sister .
Willoughby may undoubtedly have very sufficient reasons for his conduct , and I will hope that he has .
" This is admiration of a very particular kind !-- what is Miss Morton to us ?-- who knows , or who cares , for her ?-- it is Elinor of whom WE think and speak ."
A great deal of very reasonable , very just displeasure I had to persuade away .
They would see , he said , only one gentleman there besides himself ; a particular friend who was staying at the park , but who was neither very young nor very gay .
Elton had just joined them , and his wife was exclaiming ,
" Well ," said she to herself , " this is most strange !-- After I had got him off so well , to chuse to go into company , and leave Harriet ill behind !-- Most strange indeed !-- But there is , I believe , in many men , especially single men , such an inclination -- such a passion for dining out -- a dinner engagement is so high in the class of their pleasures , their employments , their dignities , almost their duties , that any thing gives way to it -- and this must be the case with Mr . Elton ; a most valuable , amiable , pleasing young man undoubtedly , and very much in love with Harriet ; but still , he cannot refuse an invitation , he must dine out wherever he is asked .
Alarming sounds were heard ; other visitors approached , and the door was thrown open for Sir Walter and Miss Elliot , whose entrance seemed to give a general chill .
He did not think we ever walked this road .
" Well ," said Mrs . Elton , laughing , " we shall see ."
Smallridge , too !
Careless of her happiness , thinking only of my own amusement , giving way to feelings which I had always been too much in the habit of indulging , I endeavoured , by every means in my power , to make myself pleasing to her , without any design of returning her affection ."
Her ' s , for me , was , I believe , fervent as the attachment of your sister to Mr . Willoughby and it was , though from a different cause , no less unfortunate .
Some change of countenance was necessary for each gentleman as they walked into Mrs . Weston ' s drawing - room ;-- Mr . Elton must compose his joyous looks , and Mr . John Knightley disperse his ill - humour .
" Another year or two may do much towards it ," he gravely replied ; " but however there is still a great deal to be done .
can he be deceitful ?"
Elinor lost no time in bringing her business forward , was on the point of concluding it , when another gentleman presented himself at her side .
" Not five minutes to spare even for your friends Miss Fairfax and Miss Bates ?
" She loves him then excessively , I suppose .
The immediate advantage to herself was by no means inconsiderable , for it supplied her with endless jokes against them both .
" And what ," said Mrs . Dashwood , " is my dear prudent Elinor going to suggest ?
It was evident that Charles Hayter was not well inclined towards Captain Wentworth .
" Oh !
He replied with his accustomary mildness to all her inquiries , but without satisfying her in any .
" When once married people begin to attack me with ,--` Oh !
If I had followed her judgment , and subdued my spirits to the level of what she deemed proper , I should have escaped the greatest unhappiness I have ever known .-- We quarrelled .-- Do you remember the morning spent at Donwell ?-- _There_ every little dissatisfaction that had occurred before came to a crisis .
" I have been more pained ," said she , " by her endeavors to acquit him than by all the rest ; for it irritates her mind more than the most perfect conviction of his unworthiness can do .
Elinor said no more , and John was also for a short time silent .-- His reflections ended thus .
I am guilty , I confess , of having often wished you to treat our acquaintance in general with greater attention ; but when have I advised you to adopt their sentiments or to conform to their judgment in serious matters ?"
The head had received a severe contusion , but he had seen greater injuries recovered from : he was by no means hopeless ; he spoke cheerfully .
She had used him ill , deserted and disappointed him ; and worse , she had shewn a feebleness of character in doing so , which his own decided , confident temper could not endure .
Where would be the use of his bringing us a charade made by a friend upon a mermaid or a shark ?
And he wrote as if he really loved her very much -- but she did not know -- and so , she was come as fast as she could to ask Miss Woodhouse what she should do .--" Emma was half - ashamed of her friend for seeming so pleased and so doubtful .
The last night ' s ball seemed lost in the gipsies .
He was afraid of catching cold I dare say , and invented this trick for getting out of it .
A short absence from home had left his fair one unguarded by his attentions at this critical period , and when he came back he had the pain of finding very altered manners , and of seeing Captain Wentworth .
She could only hang over little Charles , with most disordered feelings .
Emma was very compassionate ; and the distresses of the poor were as sure of relief from her personal attention and kindness , her counsel and her patience , as from her purse .
There was no comfort in having him in London ; he might as well be at Enscombe ; but Richmond was the very distance for easy intercourse .
Mr . Palmer is the kind of man I like ."
Your sister is certainly better , certainly out of danger ?"
Miss Bates was very chatty and good - humoured , as she always is , though she speaks rather too quick .
here it comes .
Emma felt that she could not do too much for her , that Harriet had a right to all her ingenuity and all her patience ; but it was heavy work to be for ever convincing without producing any effect , for ever agreed to , without being able to make their opinions the same .
I have no idea of that sort of thing .
Anne ' s good - will , however , was not to be lessened by what she heard .
" Ever since the day -- about four years ago -- that Miss Taylor and I met with him in Broadway Lane , when , because it began to drizzle , he darted away with so much gallantry , and borrowed two umbrellas for us from Farmer Mitchell ' s , I made up my mind on the subject .
Yes , some share of the tenderness of the past .
Anne , attending with all the strength and zeal , and thought , which instinct supplied , to Henrietta , still tried , at intervals , to suggest comfort to the others , tried to quiet Mary , to animate Charles , to assuage the feelings of Captain Wentworth .
And I must say this : that you owe no particular gratitude to him , nor attention to his wishes ; for we very well know that if he could , he would have left almost everything in the world to THEM ."
Mrs . Weston informed her that she was going to call on the Bateses , in order to hear the new instrument .
They settled in town , received very liberal assistance from Mrs . Ferrars , were on the best terms imaginable with the Dashwoods ; and setting aside the jealousies and ill - will continually subsisting between Fanny and Lucy , in which their husbands of course took a part , as well as the frequent domestic disagreements between Robert and Lucy themselves , nothing could exceed the harmony in which they all lived together .
It was a much safer place for a gentleman in his predicament : he might there be important at comparatively little expense .
and this dear parlour in which our acquaintance first began , and in which so many happy hours have been since spent by us together , you would degrade to the condition of a common entrance , and every body would be eager to pass through the room which has hitherto contained within itself more real accommodation and comfort than any other apartment of the handsomest dimensions in the world could possibly afford ."
Mr . Harris was punctual in his second visit ;-- but he came to be disappointed in his hopes of what the last would produce .
She was before me , constantly before me , as I travelled , in the same look and hue ."
" You cannot see too much perfection in Mrs . Weston for my feelings ," said Emma ; " were you to guess her to be _eighteen_ , I should listen with pleasure ; but _she_ would be ready to quarrel with you for using such words .
" I have very often wished to undeceive yourself and my mother ," added Elinor ; " and once or twice I have attempted it ;-- but without betraying my trust , I never could have convinced you ."
He had very good spirits , which never seemed much affected by his wife ' s occasional lowness , bore with her unreasonableness sometimes to Anne ' s admiration , and upon the whole , though there was very often a little disagreement ( in which she had sometimes more share than she wished , being appealed to by both parties ), they might pass for a happy couple .
I hope you do not retract what you then said ."
As to the wretched party left behind , it could scarcely be said which of the three , who were completely rational , was suffering most : Captain Wentworth , Anne , or Charles , who , really a very affectionate brother , hung over Louisa with sobs of grief , and could only turn his eyes from one sister , to see the other in a state as insensible , or to witness the hysterical agitations of his wife , calling on him for help which he could not give .
They were people whom her heart turned to very naturally .
But so little interest had be taken in the matter , that he owed all his knowledge of the house , garden , and glebe , extent of the parish , condition of the land , and rate of the tithes , to Elinor herself , who had heard so much of it from Colonel Brandon , and heard it with so much attention , as to be entirely mistress of the subject .
Emma did not want to be classed with the Mrs . Eltons , the Mrs . Perrys , and the Mrs . Coles , who would force themselves anywhere ; neither could she feel any right of preference herself -- she submitted , therefore , and only questioned Miss Bates farther as to her niece ' s appetite and diet , which she longed to be able to assist .
" Thank you , sir , thank you ; I am going this moment myself ; and I think the sooner _you_ go the better .
" I believe you are right ," he replied , " and yet I have always set her down as a lively girl ."
Elinor found , when the evening was over , that disposition is not materially altered by a change of abode , for although scarcely settled in town , Sir John had contrived to collect around him , nearly twenty young people , and to amuse them with a ball .
I have a great curiosity to know what Mr Elliot was as a very young man .
To those , however , he was very well disposed to attach himself .
Bless me !
I am not afraid of your not being exceedingly comfortable with Mrs . Goddard .
The letter F -- had been likewise invariably brought forward , and found productive of such countless jokes , that its character as the wittiest letter in the alphabet had been long established with Elinor .
She dearly loved her father , but he was no companion for her .
Mr Wentworth was the very man .
He coloured , seemed perplexed , looked doubtingly , and , after some hesitation , said ,--
A degree of unexpected cordiality , however , in the welcome she received , did her good .
Don ' t we all know that it must be a match , that they were over head and ears in love with each other from the first moment they met ?
You have proved your heart less wicked , much less wicked .
" No , that was what I dreaded .
" I am very glad you did , and that you communicated it to me .
It was a great satisfaction to Elinor that Mrs . Jennings , by being much engaged in her own room , could see little of what was passing .
" This is very true ," said she , " at least as far as relates to me , which was all that was meant -- and it is very shameful .-- Of the same age -- and always knowing her -- I ought to have been more her friend .-- She will never like me now .
He was not in spirits , however ; he praised their house , admired its prospect , was attentive , and kind ; but still he was not in spirits .
Believe them to be stronger than I have declared ; believe them , in short , to be such as his merit , and the suspicion -- the hope of his affection for me may warrant , without imprudence or folly .
I know he would be hurt by my failing in such a mark of respect to him on the present occasion .
" The Churchills are very likely in fault ," said Mr . Knightley , coolly ; " but I dare say he might come if he would ."
But they always do , you know .
But as it was her determination to subdue it , and to prevent herself from appearing to suffer more than what all her family suffered on his going away , she did not adopt the method so judiciously employed by Marianne , on a similar occasion , to augment and fix her sorrow , by seeking silence , solitude and idleness .
She saw that Enscombe could not satisfy , and that Highbury , taken at its best , might reasonably please a young man who had more retirement at home than he liked .
Her friend was not in better spirits than herself .
" My dear Harriet , I perfectly remember the substance of what I said on the occasion .
I am sure you will not like him ."
" Mrs . Dixon !
You may see her if you look this way ."
Elinor stopped him with a reproof .
Upon her speaking her wonder aloud on that part of the subject , before the few who knew her opinion of Mrs . Elton , Mrs . Weston ventured this apology for Jane .
Another view of man , my second brings ; Behold him there , the monarch of the seas !
Oh !
I would rather not be tempted .
Harriet , necessarily drawn away by her engagements with the Martins , was less and less at Hartfield ; which was not to be regretted .-- The intimacy between her and Emma must sink ; their friendship must change into a calmer sort of goodwill ; and , fortunately , what ought to be , and must be , seemed already beginning , and in the most gradual , natural manner .
" You will soon be cooler , if you sit still ," said Emma .
It is natural , and it is honourable .-- Yes , honourable , I think , to chuse so well and so gratefully .-- But that it will be a fortunate preference is more that I can promise .
Your friend , Miss Marianne , too -- which you will not be sorry to hear .
Mr . Knightley himself would be doing nothing to assist the cure ;-- not like Mr . Elton .
But now , the matter has take the strangest turn of all ; for this young lady , the same Miss Musgrove , instead of being to marry Frederick , is to marry James Benwick .
Emma thought with pleasure of some change of subject .
Neither Mr . Suckling nor me had ever any patience with them ; and we used sometimes to say very cutting things !
I am quite determined to refuse him .
Sure somebody else might be found that would do as well ; somebody that is in orders already ."
Harriet was remembered only from being _her_ friend .
Last night after tea , when you and mama went out of the room , they were whispering and talking together as fast as could be , and he seemed to be begging something of her , and presently he took up her scissors and cut off a long lock of her hair , for it was all tumbled down her back ; and he kissed it , and folded it up in a piece of white paper ; and put it into his pocket - book ."
Don ' t palm all your abuses of languages upon me ."
Anne smiled , and let it pass .
said Jane , shaking her head ; " dear Mrs . Elton , who can have thought of it as I have done ?"
An opportunity was soon to be given to the Dashwoods of debating on the rest of the children , as Sir John would not leave the house without securing their promise of dining at the park the next day .
It was the arrival of this very invitation while the Westons were at Hartfield , which made their presence so acceptable ; for though her first remark , on reading it , was that " of course it must be declined ," she so very soon proceeded to ask them what they advised her to do , that their advice for her going was most prompt and successful .
If you could be supposed to be biased in any respect by your own feelings , your opinion would not be worth having ."
Miss Carteret was with her mother ; consequently it was not reasonable to expect accommodation for all the three Camden Place ladies .
Every thing in her household arrangements was conducted on the most liberal plan , and excepting a few old city friends , whom , to Lady Middleton ' s regret , she had never dropped , she visited no one to whom an introduction could at all discompose the feelings of her young companions .
I am not at all equal to it .
Nobody could nurse her , as we should do ."
said she ; " that is the only security for its freshness ; and nothing could be easier to you ."
Soon after this , upon Elinor ' s leaving the room , " Mamma ," said Marianne , " I have an alarm on the subject of illness which I cannot conceal from you .
" But it is not to be imagined that she lives up to her income .
There was not the smallest appearance of solicitude or remark about them in the Mansion - house ; but it was different at the Cottage : the young couple there were more disposed to speculate and wonder ; and Captain Wentworth had not been above four or five times in the Miss Musgroves ' company , and Charles Hayter had but just reappeared , when Anne had to listen to the opinions of her brother and sister , as to which was the one liked best .
They had received her doubtingly , if not coolly ; and nothing beyond the merest commonplace had been talked almost all the time -- till just at last , when Mrs . Martin ' s saying , all of a sudden , that she thought Miss Smith was grown , had brought on a more interesting subject , and a warmer manner .
said Mr . Weston .
_Miss_ _Woodhouse_ appeared more than once , and never without a something of pleasing connexion , either a compliment to her taste , or a remembrance of what she had said ; and in the very last time of its meeting her eye , unadorned as it was by any such broad wreath of gallantry , she yet could discern the effect of her influence and acknowledge the greatest compliment perhaps of all conveyed .
But the family are all rich together .
I forget what we are to have next ," turning to the bill .
Mrs . Dashwood , whose terror as they drew near the house had produced almost the conviction of Marianne ' s being no more , had no voice to inquire after her , no voice even for Elinor ; but SHE , waiting neither for salutation nor inquiry , instantly gave the joyful relief ;-- and her mother , catching it with all her usual warmth , was in a moment as much overcome by her happiness , as she had been before by her fears .
She looked at her however , from time to time , anxiously ; and when the moment approached which must point him out , though not daring to look again ( for her own countenance she knew was unfit to be seen ), she was yet perfectly conscious of Lady Russell ' s eyes being turned exactly in the direction for him -- of her being , in short , intently observing him .
" I have been thinking over the past , and trying impartially to judge of the right and wrong , I mean with regard to myself ; and I must believe that I was right , much as I suffered from it , that I was perfectly right in being guided by the friend whom you will love better than you do now .
Till they all come in I shall not be missed ; and when they do , will you have the goodness to say that I am gone ?"
I have been silent from surprize merely , excessive surprize .
Perry tells me that Mr . Cole never touches malt liquor .
She could not endure to give him the true explanation ; for though her suspicions were by no means removed , she was really ashamed of having ever imparted them .
Willoughby had spent the preceding evening with them , and Margaret , by being left some time in the parlour with only him and Marianne , had had opportunity for observations , which , with a most important face , she communicated to her eldest sister , when they were next by themselves .
What blindness , what madness , had led her on !
Here too , Miss Dashwood ' s commendation , being only simple and just , came in without any eclat .
Marianne ' s joy was almost a degree beyond happiness , so great was the perturbation of her spirits and her impatience to be gone .
When he questioned , Sir Walter and Elizabeth began to question also , but the difference in their manner of doing it could not be unfelt .
The Crofts who rent Kellynch ?
Pray , pray attempt it .
I got more acquainted with him last Monday than ever I did before .
Was it new for one , perhaps too busy to seek , to be the prize of a girl who would seek him ?-- Was it new for any thing in this world to be unequal , inconsistent , incongruous -- or for chance and circumstance ( as second causes ) to direct the human fate ?
I shall press you no more ."
She began , however , seriously to turn her thoughts towards its accomplishment , and had already mentioned their wishes to their kind hostess , who resisted them with all the eloquence of her good - will , when a plan was suggested , which , though detaining them from home yet a few weeks longer , appeared to Elinor altogether much more eligible than any other .
I think it admirable ; and , as far as I can answer for myself , shall be most happy -- It seems the only improvement that could be .
He went to town on business three days ago , and I got him to take charge of some papers which I was wanting to send to John .-- He delivered these papers to John , at his chambers , and was asked by him to join their party the same evening to Astley ' s .
continued Mrs . Elton ; " Knightley himself !-- Was not it lucky ?-- for , not being within when he called the other day , I had never seen him before ; and of course , as so particular a friend of Mr . E .' s , I had a great curiosity .
She was told that now he wrote with the greatest confidence of being often with them , almost as often as he could even wish .
Mr . Knightley shook his head at her .
" Something very melancholy must be the matter , I am sure ," said she .
It seems but the work of a moment .
" Oh !
" We had your sister ' s card yesterday , and I understood Frederick had a card too , though I did not see it ; and you are disengaged , Frederick , are you not , as well as ourselves ?"
What has he been judging by ?-- I am not conscious of any difference in my spirits or conversation that could prepare him at this time for my marrying any more than at another .-- But it was so , I suppose .
It would be a pity to be divided , and we should be losing Miss Anne , too , if there is a party at her father ' s ; and I am sure neither Henrietta nor I should care at all for the play , if Miss Anne could not be with us ."
But you had better go with Mrs . Weston and hear the instrument ."
I cannot think of it .-- It won ' t do .-- Then came your dear mother to torture me farther , with all her kindness and confidence .
Anne is the only person that knows of it , and she has no judgment at all ; indeed , she does me a great deal more harm than good , for I am in constant fear of her betraying me .
I never saw any thing so outree !-- Those curls !-- This must be a fancy of her own .
I am much concerned to find there was anything in my behaviour last night that did not meet your approbation ; and though I am quite at a loss to discover in what point I could be so unfortunate as to offend you , I entreat your forgiveness of what I can assure you to have been perfectly unintentional .
" I do not doubt it ," replied he , rather astonished at her earnestness and warmth ; for had he not imagined it to be a joke for the good of her acquaintance in general , founded only on a something or a nothing between Mr . Willoughby and herself , he would not have ventured to mention it .
Don ' t fancy that you will be any inconvenience to me , for I shan ' t put myself at all out of my way for you .
yes , I always like news .
Chapter 19
You were single .
Do you think this is a good plan ?"
" This man is almost too gallant to be in love ," thought Emma .
Disingenuousness and double dealing seemed to meet him at every turn .
The answer soon presented itself .
But there was nobody to stir in it .
To talk would be only to irritate .-- She wrote to her , therefore , kindly , but decisively , to beg that she would not , at present , come to Hartfield ; acknowledging it to be her conviction , that all farther confidential discussion of _one_ topic had better be avoided ; and hoping , that if a few days were allowed to pass before they met again , except in the company of others -- she objected only to a tete - a - tete -- they might be able to act as if they had forgotten the conversation of yesterday .-- Harriet submitted , and approved , and was grateful .
" That you do not give another half - second to the subject .
She began almost to feel a dislike of Edward ; and it ended , as every feeling must end with her , by carrying back her thoughts to Willoughby , whose manners formed a contrast sufficiently striking to those of his brother elect .
Oh !
Mrs . Dashwood declared they should not stay a minute longer in the house , and your brother was forced to go down upon HIS knees too , to persuade her to let them stay till they had packed up their clothes .
She would rather busy herself about any thing than speak .
I never saw anything so charming !
" No , nothing ."
When you tell me to love him as a brother , I shall no more see imperfection in his face , than I now do in his heart ."
How much may not a few months do ?"
Anxiety and hope now oppressed her in equal degrees , and left her no moment of tranquillity till the arrival of Mr . Harris at four o ' clock ;-- when his assurances , his felicitations on a recovery in her sister even surpassing his expectation , gave her confidence , comfort , and tears of joy .
He heard Frank Churchill next say , with a glance towards Jane , " I will give it to her -- shall I ?"
" My idea of him is , that he can adapt his conversation to the taste of every body , and has the power as well as the wish of being universally agreeable .
" No ," said Marianne , in a low voice , " nor how many painful moments ."
cried Emma , shaking her head .--" Ah !
I am glad you find Mr Elliot so agreeable , and wish I could be acquainted with him too ; but I have my usual luck : I am always out of the way when any thing desirable is going on ; always the last of my family to be noticed .
I give you credit for it .
Her daughter enjoyed a most uncommon degree of popularity for a woman neither young , handsome , rich , nor married .
Their evil was incalculable .
Tell her of my misery and my penitence -- tell her that my heart was never inconstant to her , and if you will , that at this moment she is dearer to me than ever ."
I never saw Lucy in such a rage in my life .
said almost every body .
Eight years , almost eight years had passed , since all had been given up .
All that she wants is gossip , and she only likes me now because I supply it ."
It was almost enough to make her think of marrying .
Mr . Knightley could not be there too often ; he should be glad to see him every day ;-- but they did see him every day as it was .-- Why could not they go on as they had done ?
The conclusion of the whole was , that if the woman who had been sensible of Captain Wentworth ' s merits could be allowed to prefer another man , there was nothing in the engagement to excite lasting wonder ; and if Captain Wentworth lost no friend by it , certainly nothing to be regretted .
I forget where we had been walking to -- very likely to Randalls ; yes , I think it was to Randalls .
I do not know her , even by sight ."
She thought it was time to make up .
She was supported into the drawing - room between her daughter and her friend ;-- and there , shedding tears of joy , though still unable to speak , embraced Elinor again and again , turning from her at intervals to press Colonel Brandon ' s hand , with a look which spoke at once her gratitude , and her conviction of his sharing with herself in the bliss of the moment .
` Oh !'
I am so sorry we cannot stay longer ; however we shall meet again in town very soon , I hope ."
For the comfort of her children , had she consulted only her own wishes , she would have kept it ; but the discretion of Elinor prevailed .
It is , perhaps , our fate rather than our merit .
Her resolution was formed as she read .
" I am very sure that I never said any thing of either to the other , which both might not have heard ."
" As soon as I am cooler I shall go back again .
I know where you spent the morning ."
The latter , though unable to speak , seemed to feel all the tenderness of this behaviour , and after some time thus spent in joint affliction , she put all the letters into Elinor ' s hands ; and then covering her face with her handkerchief , almost screamed with agony .
" Indeed you are mistaken there , sir ; I should never augur want of spirit from Captain Benwick ' s manners .
If he had been anxious for secrecy , he would not have left the paper while I was by ; but he rather pushed it towards me than towards you .
She looked again .
The stream is as good as at first ; the little rubbish it collects in the turnings is easily moved away .
Have you heard from Mrs . John Knightley lately ?
But whether he were entirely free from peculiar attachment -- whether there were no actual preference -- remained a little longer doubtful .
I must say it is very unfeeling of him to be running away from his poor little boy .
She saw , that in persuading herself , in fancying , in acting to the contrary , she had been entirely under a delusion , totally ignorant of her own heart -- and , in short , that she had never really cared for Frank Churchill at all !
" Your poor mother , too !-- doting on Marianne ."
To him who has , it might not be so easy to burst forth at once into perfect independence , and set all their claims on his gratitude and regard at nought .
In one of these excursive glances she perceived among a group of young men , the very he , who had given them a lecture on toothpick - cases at Gray ' s .
Where is it ?
" They may be induced to go too .
Miss Steele was going to reply on the same subject , but the approach of her own party made another more necessary .
Mr . Woodhouse had so completely made up his mind to the visit , that in spite of the increasing coldness , he seemed to have no idea of shrinking from it , and set forward at last most punctually with his eldest daughter in his own carriage , with less apparent consciousness of the weather than either of the others ; too full of the wonder of his own going , and the pleasure it was to afford at Randalls to see that it was cold , and too well wrapt up to feel it .
His mother had some old friends in Bath whom she wanted to see ; it was thought a good opportunity for Henrietta to come and buy wedding - clothes for herself and her sister ; and , in short , it ended in being his mother ' s party , that everything might be comfortable and easy to Captain Harville ; and he and Mary were included in it by way of general convenience .
-- with many other relative questions , all answered with patient politeness .
" Not quite .
Anne could command herself enough to receive that look , and not repulsively .
More than former happiness would be restored .
I hope you will think better of their looks to - morrow ; for I assure you Mr . Wingfield told me , that he did not believe he had ever sent us off altogether , in such good case .
I need not tell you what is to be done .
Mrs . Hodges may well be angry .
But Mrs . John Dashwood was a strong caricature of himself ;-- more narrow - minded and selfish .
CHAPTER I
The nights were too dark for the ladies to meet again till the morrow , but Captain Harville had promised them a visit in the evening ; and he came , bringing his friend also , which was more than had been expected , it having been agreed that Captain Benwick had all the appearance of being oppressed by the presence of so many strangers .
The charming Augusta Hawkins , in addition to all the usual advantages of perfect beauty and merit , was in possession of an independent fortune , of so many thousands as would always be called ten ; a point of some dignity , as well as some convenience : the story told well ; he had not thrown himself away -- he had gained a woman of 10 , 000 l . or thereabouts ; and he had gained her with such delightful rapidity -- the first hour of introduction had been so very soon followed by distinguishing notice ; the history which he had to give Mrs . Cole of the rise and progress of the affair was so glorious -- the steps so quick , from the accidental rencontre , to the dinner at Mr . Green ' s , and the party at Mrs . Brown ' s -- smiles and blushes rising in importance -- with consciousness and agitation richly scattered -- the lady had been so easily impressed -- so sweetly disposed -- had in short , to use a most intelligible phrase , been so very ready to have him , that vanity and prudence were equally contented .
Mrs . Weston was disengaged and Emma began again --" Mr . Frank Churchill writes one of the best gentleman ' s hands I ever saw ."
Bad indeed must the nature of Marianne ' s affliction be , when her mother could talk of fortitude !
Elinor would not humour her by farther opposition .
Things must come to a crisis soon now .
" I wish we had a donkey .
Ten couple may stand here very well ."
" I can believe it ," said Elinor ; " but unfortunately he did not feel the same ."
But she felt that it was so , long , long before she could feel his influence less .
Lady Russell had little taste for wit , and of anything approaching to imprudence a horror .
" Pardon me ," replied Elinor , startled by the question ; " but I can give you no advice under such circumstances .
He said nothing worth hearing -- looked without seeing -- admired without intelligence -- listened without knowing what she said .
The chair was earnestly protested against , and Mrs Musgrove , who thought only of one sort of illness , having assured herself with some anxiety , that there had been no fall in the case ; that Anne had not at any time lately slipped down , and got a blow on her head ; that she was perfectly convinced of having had no fall ; could part with her cheerfully , and depend on finding her better at night .
But if I dared tell you all , you would not be so much surprised .
Short of that , it is all guess and luck -- and will generally be ill - luck .
" This will not be your only visit to Randalls ."
It has been involuntary , and I will not encourage it .
Elizabeth arm in arm with Miss Carteret , and looking on the broad back of the dowager Viscountess Dalrymple before her , had nothing to wish for which did not seem within her reach ; and Anne -- but it would be an insult to the nature of Anne ' s felicity , to draw any comparison between it and her sister ' s ; the origin of one all selfish vanity , of the other all generous attachment .
Whatever he might have heard against me -- ought he not to have suspended his belief ?
Some laughed , and answered good - humouredly .
" This is coming as you should do ," said she ; " like a gentleman .-- I am quite glad to see you ."
I shall talk about it to him ; he will settle for me ; he will help me out of all my difficulties .'
You would have doated on her , had you gone .-- But not a word more .
" Mr Elliot !"
" Yes ," said his brother hesitatingly , " there is a likeness .
" Such an eye !-- the true hazle eye -- and so brilliant !
Her eye half met Captain Wentworth ' s , a bow , a curtsey passed ; she heard his voice ; he talked to Mary , said all that was right , said something to the Miss Musgroves , enough to mark an easy footing ; the room seemed full , full of persons and voices , but a few minutes ended it .
you may as well take back that tiresome book she would lend me , and pretend I have read it through .
" Are you sure ?
-- repeated Frank Churchill , with a look of surprize and displeasure .-- " That is easy -- but Miss Fairfax does not disapprove it , I suppose ."
THEN she fell into hysterics again , and he was so frightened that he would send for Mr . Donavan , and Mr . Donavan found the house in all this uproar .
He seems every thing the fondest parent could .
To give the feelings or the language of Mrs . Dashwood on receiving and answering Elinor ' s letter would be only to give a repetition of what her daughters had already felt and said ; of a disappointment hardly less painful than Marianne ' s , and an indignation even greater than Elinor ' s .
She was very fond of singing .
the proper sport of boys and girls , but a single woman , of good fortune , is always respectable , and may be as sensible and pleasant as any body else .
I have no pity for either of them .
' Lord !
Surprizes are foolish things .
" This is an alliance which , whoever -- whatever your friends may be , must be agreeable to them , provided at least they have common sense ; and we are not to be addressing our conduct to fools .
One thing more , and all seemed arranged .
Miss Bates stood in the very worst predicament in the world for having much of the public favour ; and she had no intellectual superiority to make atonement to herself , or frighten those who might hate her into outward respect .
She knew him ; she saw disdain in his eye , and could not venture to believe that he had determined to accept such an offering , as an atonement for all the insolence of the past .
An annuity is a very serious business ; it comes over and over every year , and there is no getting rid of it .
" No , no ; you were better employed .
There was always sufficient reason for such an attention ; Mrs . and Miss Bates loved to be called on , and she knew she was considered by the very few who presumed ever to see imperfection in her , as rather negligent in that respect , and as not contributing what she ought to the stock of their scanty comforts .
But , however , I found afterwards from Patty , that William said it was all the apples of _that_ sort his master had ; he had brought them all -- and now his master had not one left to bake or boil .
Colonel Wallis said it , and Lady Russell saw it ; but it had been no unhappiness to sour his mind , nor ( she began pretty soon to suspect ) to prevent his thinking of a second choice .
cried Emma , turning her glowing cheeks towards him ; for , while she spoke , it occurred to her that he might have called at Mrs . Goddard ' s in his way .
Emma ' s colour was heightened by this unjust praise ; and with a smile , and shake of the head , which spoke much , she looked at Mr .
Emma wondered whether the same suspicion of what might be expected from their knowing each other , which had taken strong possession of her mind , had ever crossed his ; and whether his compliments were to be considered as marks of acquiescence , or proofs of defiance .
I was not aware of it myself .
Elinor was hardly less anxious than herself for their removal , and only so much less bent on its being effected immediately , as that she was conscious of the difficulties of so long a journey , which Marianne could not be brought to acknowledge .
I have seen a great deal of him , have studied his sentiments and heard his opinion on subjects of literature and taste ; and , upon the whole , I venture to pronounce that his mind is well - informed , enjoyment of books exceedingly great , his imagination lively , his observation just and correct , and his taste delicate and pure .
the blessing of a female correspondent , when one is really interested in the absent !-- she will tell me every thing .
" I am perfectly satisfied ," replied Emma , with the brightest smiles , " and most sincerely wish them happy ."
Pray be so good as to mention to the other gentlemen that we hope to see your whole party this evening .
A conundrum of Mr . Weston ' s shall clear him and his next neighbour .
Every thing in such suspense and uncertainty ; and seeing him so seldom -- we can hardly meet above twice a - year .
Till you chose to turn her into a friend , her mind had no distaste for her own set , nor any ambition beyond it .
She was not less pleased another day with the manner in which he seconded a sudden wish of hers , to have Harriet ' s picture .
" You are ungrateful ."
She admired him for contriving it , though not able to give him much credit for the manner in which it was announced .
To do him justice , he did every thing in his power to promote their unreserve , by making the Miss Steeles acquainted with whatever he knew or supposed of his cousins ' situations in the most delicate particulars ,-- and Elinor had not seen them more than twice , before the eldest of them wished her joy on her sister ' s having been so lucky as to make a conquest of a very smart beau since she came to Barton .
If I draw less , I shall read more ; if I give up music , I shall take to carpet - work .
Frank Churchill comes as regularly into my mind !"
" Might he be trusted with the commission , what infinite pleasure should he have in executing it !
He is going to Kingston .
Elinor submitted to the arrangement which counteracted her wishes with less reluctance than she had expected to feel .
That will obviate all difficulties you know ; and from _us_ I really think , my dear Jane , you can have no scruple to accept such an accommodation ."
there is nothing like staying at home for real comfort .
" I will answer for it , that mine thinks herself full as clever , and would spurn any body ' s assistance ."
We will not be severe ."
All looked up to them .
He had hoped she would speak again , but she did not .
" Now , my dear , I bring you something that I am sure will do you good ."
There , it is done .
He could say no more ; and with the hope of Hartfield to reward him , returned with Mrs . Weston to Mrs . Bates ' s door .
Some time afterwards it was , " I think Mrs . Goddard would be very much surprized if she knew what had happened .
All that Mrs . Ferrars could say to make him put an end to the engagement , assisted too as you may well suppose by my arguments , and Fanny ' s entreaties , was of no avail .
The news was universally a surprize wherever it spread ; and Mr . Weston had his five minutes share of it ; but five minutes were enough to familiarise the idea to his quickness of mind .-- He saw the advantages of the match , and rejoiced in them with all the constancy of his wife ; but the wonder of it was very soon nothing ; and by the end of an hour he was not far from believing that he had always foreseen it .
We all wish her extremely happy ; and Mrs . Ferrars ' s conduct throughout the whole , has been such as every conscientious , good mother , in like circumstances , would adopt .
They quitted it only with the removal of the tea - things .
Knightley ?-- Who was so useful to him , who so ready to write his letters , who so glad to assist him ?-- Who so cheerful , so attentive , so attached to him ?-- Would not he like to have him always on the spot ?-- Yes .
Nothing was wanting but to be happy when they got there .
Mr . Churchill was better than could be expected ; and their first removal , on the departure of the funeral for Yorkshire , was to be to the house of a very old friend in Windsor , to whom Mr . Churchill had been promising a visit the last ten years .
There is always something offensive in the details of cunning .
" Bartlett ' s Building , March .
Perry was surprized to hear you had fixed upon South End ."
I am sure they will be married very soon , for he has got a lock of her hair ."
Penelope , my dear , can you help me to the name of the gentleman who lived at Monkford : Mrs Croft ' s brother ?"
" Don ' t you find it colder than it was in the morning , Elinor ?
On going down to breakfast the next morning , she found there had just been a decent pretence on the lady ' s side of meaning to leave them .
Even THEN , however , when fully determined on paying my addresses to her , I allowed myself most improperly to put off , from day to day , the moment of doing it , from an unwillingness to enter into an engagement while my circumstances were so greatly embarrassed .
Grandmama was quite well , had a charming evening with Mr . Woodhouse , a vast deal of chat , and backgammon .-- Tea was made downstairs , biscuits and baked apples and wine before she came away : amazing luck in some of her throws : and she inquired a great deal about you , how you were amused , and who were your partners .
" No ," replied Elinor , most feelingly sensible of every fresh circumstance in favour of Lucy ' s veracity ; " I remember he told us , that he had been staying a fortnight with some friends near Plymouth ."
" I presume to observe , Sir Walter , that , in the way of business , gentlemen of the navy are well to deal with .
" No , ma ' am ; THAT was not very likely ."
" No , indeed , it is not ."
And in this style he talked on for some time very properly , not much attending to any answer , but altogether sufficiently awake to the terror of a bad sore throat ; and Emma was quite in charity with him .
Leave shame to her .
Oh !
To suffer her to engage herself -- to suffer her even to think of such a measure !"
The son , a steady respectable young man , was amply provided for by the fortune of his mother , which had been large , and half of which devolved on him on his coming of age .
It is something for a woman to be assured , in her eight - and - twentieth year , that she has not lost one charm of earlier youth ; but the value of such homage was inexpressibly increased to Anne , by comparing it with former words , and feeling it to be the result , not the cause of a revival of his warm attachment .
She did not do any of it in the same way that she used ; I could see she was altered ; but , however , she seemed to _try_ to be very friendly , and we shook hands , and stood talking some time ; but I know no more what I said -- I was in such a tremble !-- I remember she said she was sorry we never met now ; which I thought almost too kind !
Did you never hear him talk of Mr .
" Do you like London ?"
" A man who has nothing to do with his own time has no conscience in his intrusion on that of others ."
He had gone away deeply offended -- he came back engaged to another -- and to another as superior , of course , to the first , as under such circumstances what is gained always is to what is lost .
" I am convinced ," said Edward , " that you really feel all the delight in a fine prospect which you profess to feel .
Mrs Smith looked at her again , looked earnestly , smiled , shook her head , and exclaimed --
One feels that it cannot be a very long acquaintance .
She did not regret it .
I did not immediately recollect .
Not that he will value it as he ought ," he observed , " Charles is too cool about sporting .
Such a friend as Mrs . Weston was out of the question .
And , by the bye , can I or my housekeeper be of any use to you with our opinion ?-- Pray be sincere , Knightley .
" Who shall answer that question ?"
Emma , I must tell you what you will not ask , though I may wish it unsaid the next moment ."
The whole was tied up for the benefit of this child , who , in occasional visits with his father and mother at Norland , had so far gained on the affections of his uncle , by such attractions as are by no means unusual in children of two or three years old ; an imperfect articulation , an earnest desire of having his own way , many cunning tricks , and a great deal of noise , as to outweigh all the value of all the attention which , for years , he had received from his niece and her daughters .
" The consequence of which , I suppose , will be ," said Mrs . Dashwood , " since leisure has not promoted your own happiness , that your sons will be brought up to as many pursuits , employments , professions , and trades as Columella ' s ."
She had an excellent heart ;-- her disposition was affectionate , and her feelings were strong ; but she knew how to govern them : it was a knowledge which her mother had yet to learn ; and which one of her sisters had resolved never to be taught .
And for a little while she hoped he would not talk of it , and that a silent rumination might suffice to restore him to the relish of his own smooth gruel .
Would either of them only have given her a full and minute account of the whole affair between Marianne and Mr . Willoughby , she would have thought herself amply rewarded for the sacrifice of the best place by the fire after dinner , which their arrival occasioned .
we shall sit and gape at one another as dull as two cats ."
But I beg your pardon ; I have interrupted you .
Mr Elliot came back accordingly ; and on application was forgiven , as you know , and re - admitted into the family ; and there it was his constant object , and his only object ( till your arrival added another motive ), to watch Sir Walter and Mrs Clay .
Emma was very decided in thinking such an attachment no bad thing for her friend .
The distress of her sister too , particularly a favourite , was before her ;-- and as for their mother , when Mrs . Jennings considered that Marianne might probably be to HER what Charlotte was to herself , her sympathy in HER sufferings was very sincere .
say beautiful rather .
Do but consider , my dear Mr . Dashwood , how excessively comfortable your mother - in - law and her daughters may live on the interest of seven thousand pounds , besides the thousand pounds belonging to each of the girls , which brings them in fifty pounds a year a - piece , and , of course , they will pay their mother for their board out of it .
Harriet unfolded the parcel , and she looked on with impatience .
asked Isabella in the plaintive tone which just suited her father .
" Emma ," said she , " this paper is worse than I expected .
The consideration of Mrs . Dennison ' s mistake , in supposing his sisters their guests , had suggested the propriety of their being really invited to become such , while Mrs . Jenning ' s engagements kept her from home .
The Westons will be with us , and it will be quite delightful .
cried he , catching the same tone ; " I honour you !"
So far it is very true .
There can be no doubt of its being written for you and to you ."
not handsome -- not at all handsome .
But it appears -- I should hope it would be a very happy match .
" Whoever might be her parents ," said Mr . Knightley , " whoever may have had the charge of her , it does not appear to have been any part of their plan to introduce her into what you would call good society .
When they had been all walking together , he had so often come and walked by her , and talked so very delightfully !-- He seemed to want to be acquainted with her .
" No ," replied Elinor , " her opinions are all romantic ."
Emma perceived that her taste was not the only taste on which Mr . Weston depended , and felt , that to be the favourite and intimate of a man who had so many intimates and confidantes , was not the very first distinction in the scale of vanity .
The beginning , however , of every visit displayed none but the properest feelings , and this being of necessity so short might be hoped to pass away in unsullied cordiality .
" Indeed ," answered Elinor , " I have NOT forgotten it ."
At one time Patty came to say she thought the kitchen chimney wanted sweeping .
" I believe it would be the wisest way to put an end to the business at once by dissolving the engagement .
" I do not ask whether you are musical , Mrs . Elton .
I know we shall be happy .
Her father ' s comfort was amply secured , Mrs . Bates as well as Mrs . Goddard being able to come ; and her last pleasing duty , before she left the house , was to pay her respects to them as they sat together after dinner ; and while her father was fondly noticing the beauty of her dress , to make the two ladies all the amends in her power , by helping them to large slices of cake and full glasses of wine , for whatever unwilling self - denial his care of their constitution might have obliged them to practise during the meal .-- She had provided a plentiful dinner for them ; she wished she could know that they had been allowed to eat it .
Dixon ."
But then there is not so clever a man any where ."
" Mr .
His reading has done him no harm , for he has fought as well as read .
A doubt of her regard , supposing him to feel it , need not give him more than inquietude .
So far it was all as she had foreseen ; but on entering the house she beheld what no foresight had taught her to expect .
With the size and furniture of the house Mrs . Dashwood was upon the whole well satisfied ; for though her former style of life rendered many additions to the latter indispensable , yet to add and improve was a delight to her ; and she had at this time ready money enough to supply all that was wanted of greater elegance to the apartments .
As for Isabella , she has been married long enough to see the convenience of putting all the Mr . Westons aside as much as she can ."
His own two thousand pounds she protested should be his all ; she would never see him again ; and so far would she be from affording him the smallest assistance , that if he were to enter into any profession with a view of better support , she would do all in her power to prevent him advancing in it ."
Ah !
" Ah !
These were very cheering thoughts ; and the sight of a great deal of snow on the ground did her further service , for any thing was welcome that might justify their all three being quite asunder at present .
Very thoughtful of Colonel Campbell , was not it ?-- He knew Miss Fairfax could have no music here .
I began to think I should never see you .
I hope he will not mind it so very much ."
" Anne ," cried Mary , still at her window , " there is Mrs Clay , I am sure , standing under the colonnade , and a gentleman with her .
Uppercross excited no interest , Kellynch very little : it was all Bath .
Allowances , large allowances , she knew , must be made for the ideas of those who spoke .
Mr . Martin looked as if he did not know what manner was .
Few women could think more of their personal appearance than he did , nor could the valet of any new made lord be more delighted with the place he held in society .
The heat was excessive ; he had never suffered any thing like it -- almost wished he had staid at home -- nothing killed him like heat -- he could bear any degree of cold , etc ., but heat was intolerable -- and he sat down , at the greatest possible distance from the slight remains of Mr . Woodhouse ' s fire , looking very deplorable .
" You have something to tell me of Mr . Willoughby , that will open his character farther .
It inspired little more than an animating curiosity .
Miss Carteret was very anxious to have a general idea of what was next to be sung .
I think it is the state of mind which gives most spirit and delight .
He had imagined himself indifferent , when he had only been angry ; and he had been unjust to her merits , because he had been a sufferer from them .
Do not let me lose it .
Knightley .'
" I do not know which it ought to be called ."
It crossed my mind immediately that you would not regret your friend ' s leaving Highbury , for the sake of her being settled so well .
It was lower and quicker than ever !
When she was half - way up the set , the whole group were exactly behind her , and she would no longer allow her eyes to watch ; but Mr . Elton was so near , that she heard every syllable of a dialogue which just then took place between him and Mrs . Weston ; and she perceived that his wife , who was standing immediately above her , was not only listening also , but even encouraging him by significant glances .-- The kind - hearted , gentle Mrs . Weston had left her seat to join him and say , " Do not you dance , Mr .
What I thought , what I feared , may be imagined ; and what I suffered too ."
Busy as he was , however , the young man was yet able to shew a most happy countenance on seeing Emma again .
She is a monstrous lucky girl to get him , upon my honour ; not but that he is much more lucky in getting her , because she is so very handsome and agreeable , that nothing can be good enough for her .
That was all very true .
But I am a partial old friend ."
" Indeed !"
The lady is the Hon .
" Nor I ," answered Marianne with energy , " our situations then are alike .
You do not know how many candidates there always are for the _first_ situations .
She took hardly any notice of Charles Hayter yesterday .
Colonel Brandon ' s delicate , unobtrusive enquiries were never unwelcome to Miss Dashwood .
If the Westons think it worth while to be at all this trouble for a few hours of noisy entertainment , I have nothing to say against it , but that they shall not chuse pleasures for me .-- Oh !
" To be sure ," continued Lucy , after a few minutes silence on both sides , " his mother must provide for him sometime or other ; but poor Edward is so cast down by it !
" My dear Emma ," said he , moving from his chair into one close by her , " you are not going to tell me , I hope , that you had not a pleasant evening ."
I wish you could have heard how she talked of it -- with what candour and generosity .
" Perhaps you may now begin to regret that you spent one whole day , out of so few , in having your hair cut ."
I am extremely happy .
I have known a face not materially disfigured by a few , but he abominates them .
I should not like a man who is so soon discomposed by a hot morning .
Indeed , Miss Woodhouse , ( speaking more collectedly ,) with the consciousness which I have of misconduct , very great misconduct , it is particularly consoling to me to know that those of my friends , whose good opinion is most worth preserving , are not disgusted to such a degree as to -- I have not time for half that I could wish to say .
Marianne could not bear this .-- She was already greatly displeased with Mrs . Ferrars ; and such ill - timed praise of another , at Elinor ' s expense , though she had not any notion of what was principally meant by it , provoked her immediately to say with warmth ,
When Mrs . Jennings attacked her one evening at the park , to give the name of the young man who was Elinor ' s particular favourite , which had been long a matter of great curiosity to her , Margaret answered by looking at her sister , and saying , " I must not tell , may I , Elinor ?"
-- She paused .
At the time of the ballroom ' s being built , suppers had not been in question ; and a small card - room adjoining , was the only addition .
It was a done thing ; Mr . Elton was to go , and never had his broad handsome face expressed more pleasure than at this moment ; never had his smile been stronger , nor his eyes more exulting than when he next looked at her .
that ' s a very good thought , very good , indeed .
" Yes , very ."
The thing would be for us all to come on donkeys , Jane , Miss Bates , and me -- and my caro sposo walking by .
She thought nothing of his attachment , and was insulted by his hopes .
They had not remained in this manner long , before Elinor perceived Willoughby , standing within a few yards of them , in earnest conversation with a very fashionable looking young woman .
His colour increased ; and with his eyes fixed on the ground he only replied , " You are too good ."
for I know gentlemen do not like morning visits , and Mr . Elton ' s time is so engaged ."
" I have never had a high opinion of Frank Churchill .-- I can suppose , however , that I may have underrated him .
I was banished to the house of a relation far distant , and she was allowed no liberty , no society , no amusement , till my father ' s point was gained .
I could almost assert that you had _named_ Mr . Frank Churchill .
However , we may as well go and sit with them a little while , and when we have that over , we can enjoy our walk ."
Smith ?"
You must have heard him notice Mrs Clay ' s freckles ."
Every body who sees it is struck by its beauty ; but to me , it has been quite a home .
It was a little fever of admiration ; but it might , probably must , end in love with some .
Most cordially , when Miss Bates arrived , did she agree that it must .
But they are Lady Middleton ' s visitors .
Nobody supposes that you were his first inducement .
Had my brother given me some active profession when I was removed at eighteen from the care of Mr . Pratt , I think -- nay , I am sure , it would never have happened ; for though I left Longstaple with what I thought , at the time , a most unconquerable preference for his niece , yet had I then had any pursuit , any object to engage my time and keep me at a distance from her for a few months , I should very soon have outgrown the fancied attachment , especially by mixing more with the world , as in such case I must have done .
But I should have thought her hair had been darker ."
" Why did you call , Mr .
You should not have done it , indeed you should not .
Your wishes are all moderate ."
He valued their kindness beyond any thing , and his greatest happiness was in being with them .
" A man of whom he had always had such reason to think well !
That he should be married soon , before ( as she imagined ) he could be in orders , and consequently before he could be in possession of the living , surprised her a little at first .
" Poor Frederick !"
Mr . Knightley , I wish you had the benefit of this ; I think this would convince you .
" How long has this been known to you , Elinor ?
" Very nicely dressed , indeed ; a remarkably elegant gown ."
There could not be a doubt , to her mind there was none , of what would follow her recovery .
As for herself , she might always command a home with Lady Russell .
I have not heard of any thing to please me so well since Charlotte was brought to bed ."
one can ' t repeat such kind of things you know )-- she told him directly , she had not the least mind in the world to be off , for she could live with him upon a trifle , and how little so ever he might have , she should be very glad to have it all , you know , or something of the kind .
I will not allow it to be more man ' s nature than woman ' s to be inconstant and forget those they do love , or have loved .
Anne had called several times on her friend , before the existence of such a person was known in Camden Place .
was scarcely less warm than hers ; and whose mind -- Oh !
I am always glad to see him .
" Quite out of the question , quite out of the question ," he replied ;-- " but you must often wish it , I am sure ."
" Well ," said Emma , " I suppose we shall gradually grow reconciled to the idea , and I wish them very happy .
" Well -- as you please ; only don ' t have a great set out .
" Where shall we go ?"
So ended the first part , which had been afterwards put into an envelope , containing nearly as much more .
Harriet was standing at one of the windows .
that is quite surprising , for we have had a vast deal of rain here .
Jane , you have never seen Mr .
So exceeding affable as she was !-- You know how I dreaded the thoughts of seeing her ;-- but the very moment I was introduced , there was such an affability in her behaviour as really should seem to say , she had quite took a fancy to me .
was Mrs . Weston ' s parting question .
It was not in his calmness that she read his comparative difference .
In my Bath life , I have seen such instances of it !
I have now another motive for being glad that I can produce it ."
Emma remained very well pleased with this beginning of the acquaintance , and could now engage to think of them all at Randalls any hour of the day , with full confidence in their comfort .
Tunbridge Wells ," and dated from London , as far back as July , 1803 : --
In Frank ' s last letter she complained , he said , of being too weak to get into her conservatory without having both his arm and his uncle ' s !
I have never been attached to him .
My dear sir , you are too obliging .
If Elizabeth and her father did not deceive themselves , had been taking much pains to seek the acquaintance , and proclaim the value of the connection , as he had formerly taken pains to shew neglect .
Her plan of sitting with Lady Russell must give way for the present .
Harry was vastly pleased .
I shall leave you together .
She could not immediately have uttered another sentence ; her heart was too full , her breath too much oppressed .
I was very unwilling to enter into it , as you may imagine , without the knowledge and approbation of his mother ; but I was too young , and loved him too well , to be so prudent as I ought to have been .-- Though you do not know him so well as me , Miss Dashwood , you must have seen enough of him to be sensible he is very capable of making a woman sincerely attached to him ."
perfectly .
And Mrs Musgrove took the first opportunity of being alone with Anne , to say , " Oh !
Mrs . Perry had told somebody , and was extremely happy about it .
" No -- Mrs . Knightley ;-- and till she is in being , I will manage such matters myself ."
Since the death of her husband , who had traded with success in a less elegant part of the town , she had resided every winter in a house in one of the streets near Portman Square .
" I am , dear Madam , " Your most obedient " humble servant , " JOHN WILLOUGHBY ."
" Is she unwell ?"
After receiving a very indifferent education she is left in Mrs . Goddard ' s hands to shift as she can ;-- to move , in short , in Mrs . Goddard ' s line , to have Mrs . Goddard ' s acquaintance .
But I thought he would have staid now , and it would have been a pity not to have mentioned .
" Is not she ?
Emma understood him ; and as soon as she could recover from the flutter of pleasure , excited by such tender consideration , replied ,
" My dear Mrs Smith , Mr Elliot ' s wife has not been dead much above half a year .
Mr . Churchill has pride ; but his pride is nothing to his wife ' s : his is a quiet , indolent , gentlemanlike sort of pride that would harm nobody , and only make himself a little helpless and tiresome ; but her pride is arrogance and insolence !
Whatever they may have been , however , she may now , and hereafter doubtless WILL turn with gratitude towards her own condition , when she compares it with that of my poor Eliza , when she considers the wretched and hopeless situation of this poor girl , and pictures her to herself , with an affection for him so strong , still as strong as her own , and with a mind tormented by self - reproach , which must attend her through life .
She saw it with concern ; for what could a silent man of five and thirty hope , when opposed to a very lively one of five and twenty ?
Is Allenham the only house in the neighbourhood to which you will be welcome ?
This weather will keep many sportsmen in the country ."
very well ," exclaimed Miss Bates , " then I need not be uneasy .
Emma would not have smiled for the world , and only said , " Is Mr . Elton gone on foot to Donwell ?-- He will have a hot walk ."
the great - coat was hanging over the panel , and hid the arms , so it did ; otherwise , I am sure , I should have observed them , and the livery too ; if the servant had not been in mourning , one should have known him by the livery ."
Lady Middleton had sent a very civil message by him , denoting her intention of waiting on Mrs . Dashwood as soon as she could be assured that her visit would be no inconvenience ; and as this message was answered by an invitation equally polite , her ladyship was introduced to them the next day .
said Captain Harville .
She absolutely refused to allow me , which I then thought most unreasonable .
This does not apply , however , to Miss Bates ; she is only too good natured and too silly to suit me ; but , in general , she is very much to the taste of every body , though single and though poor .
" Ay , true enough ," ( with a deep sigh ) " only June ."
Harriet had not surmised her own danger , but the idea of it struck her forcibly .
Mrs Croft , though neither tall nor fat , had a squareness , uprightness , and vigour of form , which gave importance to her person .
There now , YOU are going to laugh at me too .
" I am sorry I do NOT ," said Elinor , in great astonishment , " if it could be of any use to YOU to know my opinion of her .
The two ladies continued to talk , to re - urge the same admitted truths , and enforce them with such examples of the ill effect of a contrary practice as had fallen within their observation , but Anne heard nothing distinctly ; it was only a buzz of words in her ear , her mind was in confusion .
I advise every body who is going to build , to build a cottage .
" If she had not known him to be in town she would not have written to him , as she did ; she would have written to Combe Magna ; and if he is in town , how odd that he should neither come nor write !
But you were preparing yourself to be an excellent wife all the time you were at Hartfield .
As the blow was given , Emma felt that she could not now shew greater kindness than in listening ; and Harriet , unchecked , ran eagerly through what she had to tell .
You must come , indeed .
Mr . Woodhouse was soon ready for his tea ; and when he had drank his tea he was quite ready to go home ; and it was as much as his three companions could do , to entertain away his notice of the lateness of the hour , before the other gentlemen appeared .
" She will think Frank ought to ask her ."
With what indignation such a letter as this must be read by Miss Dashwood , may be imagined .
" On the contrary , nothing can be a stronger proof of it , Elinor ; for if there had been any real impropriety in what I did , I should have been sensible of it at the time , for we always know when we are acting wrong , and with such a conviction I could have had no pleasure ."
Mr . Weston was musing .
" I do own myself to have been completely mistaken in Mr . Elton .
The pianoforte at which Marianne , wrapped up in her own music and her own thoughts , had by this time forgotten that any body was in the room besides herself , was luckily so near them that Miss Dashwood now judged she might safely , under the shelter of its noise , introduce the interesting subject , without any risk of being heard at the card - table .
Some minutes passed in this unpleasant silence , with only one attempt on Emma ' s side to talk of the weather , but he made no answer .
But you , ( turning to Mr . Knightley ,) who know how very , very seldom I am ever two hours from Hartfield , why you should foresee such a series of dissipation for me , I cannot imagine .
Thirteen winters ' revolving frosts had seen her opening every ball of credit which a scanty neighbourhood afforded , and thirteen springs shewn their blossoms , as she travelled up to London with her father , for a few weeks ' annual enjoyment of the great world .
At his and Mrs . Jennings ' s united request in return , Mrs . Dashwood was prevailed on to accept the use of his carriage on her journey back , for the better accommodation of her sick child ; and the Colonel , at the joint invitation of Mrs . Dashwood and Mrs . Jennings , whose active good - nature made her friendly and hospitable for other people as well as herself , engaged with pleasure to redeem it by a visit at the cottage , in the course of a few weeks .
I could never tell whether an attachment between you and Mr . Elton were most desirable or most natural .
These were pleasant feelings , and she walked about and indulged them till it was necessary to do as the others did , and collect round the strawberry - beds .-- The whole party were assembled , excepting Frank Churchill , who was expected every moment from Richmond ; and Mrs . Elton , in all her apparatus of happiness , her large bonnet and her basket , was very ready to lead the way in gathering , accepting , or talking -- strawberries , and only strawberries , could now be thought or spoken of .--" The best fruit in England -- every body ' s favourite -- always wholesome .-- These the finest beds and finest sorts .-- Delightful to gather for one ' s self -- the only way of really enjoying them .-- Morning decidedly the best time -- never tired -- every sort good -- hautboy infinitely superior -- no comparison -- the others hardly eatable -- hautboys very scarce -- Chili preferred -- white wood finest flavour of all -- price of strawberries in London -- abundance about Bristol -- Maple Grove -- cultivation -- beds when to be renewed -- gardeners thinking exactly different -- no general rule -- gardeners never to be put out of their way -- delicious fruit -- only too rich to be eaten much of -- inferior to cherries -- currants more refreshing -- only objection to gathering strawberries the stooping -- glaring sun -- tired to death -- could bear it no longer -- must go and sit in the shade ."
" A house of her own !-- But where is the advantage of a house of her own ?
Consider ," she added , " that when the money is once parted with , it never can return .
His wife gave him a look which invited him in ; and , while he was coming round , added , " Now , dearest Emma , let me intreat you to say and look every thing that may set his heart at ease , and incline him to be satisfied with the match .
She stopped , regretting with a deep blush that she had implied so much ; but less would hardly have been sufficient .
Elinor was to be the comforter of others in her own distresses , no less than in theirs ; and all the comfort that could be given by assurances of her own composure of mind , and a very earnest vindication of Edward from every charge but of imprudence , was readily offered .
She felt as if the spring would not pass without bringing a crisis , an event , a something to alter her present composed and tranquil state .
The Middletons were to follow in about a week .
This however was what Lady Russell had now to do .
I mean in person -- tall , and with that sort of look -- and not very talkative ."
The prospect before her now , was threatening to a degree that could not be entirely dispelled -- that might not be even partially brightened .
I was there -- one of the party ."
It is such a pretty charade , my dear , that I can easily guess what fairy brought it .-- Nobody could have written so prettily , but you , Emma ."
Come , my dear Emma , let us be friends , and say no more about it .
However , I shan ' t say anything against them to YOU ; and to be sure they did send us home in their own chariot , which was more than I looked for .
As Elinor was neither musical , nor affecting to be so , she made no scruple of turning her eyes from the grand pianoforte , whenever it suited her , and unrestrained even by the presence of a harp , and violoncello , would fix them at pleasure on any other object in the room .
Mr . Knightley had been telling him something about brewing spruce - beer , and he wanted to put it down ; but when he took out his pencil , there was so little lead that he soon cut it all away , and it would not do , so you lent him another , and this was left upon the table as good for nothing .
After being long fed with hopes of a speedy visit from Mr . and Mrs . Suckling , the Highbury world were obliged to endure the mortification of hearing that they could not possibly come till the autumn .
Lady Russell and Mrs Croft were very well pleased with each other : but the acquaintance which this visit began was fated not to proceed far at present ; for when it was returned , the Crofts announced themselves to be going away for a few weeks , to visit their connexions in the north of the county , and probably might not be at home again before Lady Russell would be removing to Bath .
Lord !
I was last month at my friend Elliott ' s , near Dartford .
I met him just now .
When they all sat down it was better ; to her taste a great deal better , for Frank Churchill grew talkative and gay , making her his first object .
" Yes -- I imagined -- that is -- I did not --"
" I think ," replied Edward , " that I may defy many months to produce any good to me ."
Again they all sat down , and for a moment or two all were silent ; while Marianne was looking with the most speaking tenderness , sometimes at Edward and sometimes at Elinor , regretting only that their delight in each other should be checked by Lucy ' s unwelcome presence .
In re - settling themselves there were now many changes , the result of which was favourable for her .
And Jane declares -- Well !--( as soon as she was within the door ) Well !
Mrs . Palmer , in her way , was equally angry .
She had no doubt as to his being less in love -- but neither his agitated spirits , nor his hurrying away , seemed like a perfect cure ; and she was rather inclined to think it implied a dread of her returning power , and a discreet resolution of not trusting himself with her long .
Don ' t pretend to defend him .
He then took leave of the whole party .
Unaccountable , however , as the circumstances of his release might appear to the whole family , it was certain that Edward was free ; and to what purpose that freedom would be employed was easily pre - determined by all ;-- for after experiencing the blessings of ONE imprudent engagement , contracted without his mother ' s consent , as he had already done for more than four years , nothing less could be expected of him in the failure of THAT , than the immediate contraction of another .
It was an unaccountable business .
" I am afraid I am sometimes very fanciful and troublesome ."
being all that she had time for , as she passed away .
I was so astonished when she first told me what she had been saying to Mrs . Elton , and when Mrs . Elton at the same moment came congratulating me upon it !
I walked and rode a great deal ; and the more I saw , the more I found to admire ."
" Poor old gentleman ."
The Baronet will never set the Thames on fire , but there seems to be no harm in him ."
She met Mr . Weston on his entrance , with a smiling countenance , exclaiming ,
and I always thought you meant it ."
The Woodhouses were first in consequence there .
Weston was alone in the drawing - room :-- but hardly had they been told of the baby , and Mr . Woodhouse received the thanks for coming , which he asked for , when a glimpse was caught through the blind , of two figures passing near the window .
I suppose there is not a man in such practice anywhere .
On the contrary , when he saw more of Captain Wentworth , saw him repeatedly by daylight , and eyed him well , he was very much struck by his personal claims , and felt that his superiority of appearance might be not unfairly balanced against her superiority of rank ; and all this , assisted by his well - sounding name , enabled Sir Walter at last to prepare his pen , with a very good grace , for the insertion of the marriage in the volume of honour .
" No , no , that ' s to - morrow ; and I particularly wanted to see Knightley to - day on that very account .-- Such a dreadful broiling morning !-- I went over the fields too --( speaking in a tone of great ill - usage ,) which made it so much the worse .
I shall have no difficulty , I suppose , in finding the house ; though Fairfax , I believe , is not the proper name -- I should rather say Barnes , or Bates .
as to all that , of course nothing can be thought of yet .
" I am delighted with the plan ," she cried , " it is exactly what I could wish .
Has not my consent been daily asked by his looks , his manner , his attentive and affectionate respect ?
You seem shut out from every thing -- in the most complete retirement .-- And Mrs . Churchill probably has not health or spirits like Selina to enjoy that sort of seclusion .
" No , Elinor ," she replied , " ask nothing ; you will soon know all ."
I hope you turned directly ."
He must have all Edward ' s virtues , and his person and manners must ornament his goodness with every possible charm ."
" Good God !"
At seventeen she was lost to me for ever .
Anne kept her appointment ; the others kept theirs , and of course she heard the next morning that they had had a delightful evening .
" She is not well , she has had a nervous complaint on her for several weeks ."
" Now you are taking nonsense , Mary ," was therefore his answer .
Yes , indeed , oh yes !
I have laid down my plan , and if I am capable of adhering to it -- my feelings shall be governed and my temper improved .
Her removal was impossible .
" I hope he does ," replied Mr . Knightley coolly , and resuming the letter .
" Lord !
Willoughby , " poor Willoughby ," as she now allowed herself to call him , was constantly in her thoughts ; she would not but have heard his vindication for the world , and now blamed , now acquitted herself for having judged him so harshly before .
" While her dear father lived , any change of condition must be impossible for her .
certainly not too tall ; not in the least too tall .
Could Elinor have listened to her without interruption from the others , she would have described every room in the house with equal delight .
And when you get there , you must tell him at what time you would have him come for you again ; and you had better name an early hour .
my dear , human flesh !
.
shark is only one syllable .
It is a great while since we met ."
What are you proud of ?
They were a family of the name of Martin , whom Emma well knew by character , as renting a large farm of Mr . Knightley , and residing in the parish of Donwell -- very creditably , she believed -- she knew Mr . Knightley thought highly of them -- but they must be coarse and unpolished , and very unfit to be the intimates of a girl who wanted only a little more knowledge and elegance to be quite perfect .
A few days had made a change indeed !
" That is exactly what I said , my dear .
I could change my shoes , you know , the moment I got home ; and it is not the sort of thing that gives me cold ."
My heart bled for you , as I talked of happiness ; and yet he is sensible , he is agreeable , and with such a woman as you , it was not absolutely hopeless .
You have hit upon the very thing to please me ."
" I am thankful to find that I can look with so little pain on the spot !-- shall we ever talk on that subject , Elinor ?"
Better be without sense , than misapply it as you do ."
She was very much obliged to him , but declined it all , repeating her conviction , that the rain would come to nothing at present , and adding , " I am only waiting for Mr Elliot .
" Yet it certainly soon will happen .
This was obliged to be repeated before it could be believed ; and Mr . Knightley actually looked red with surprize and displeasure , as he stood up , in tall indignation , and said ,
Such an immense plantation all round it !
Mary talked , but she could not attend .
Considering everything , therefore , I hope , foolish as our engagement was , foolish as it has since in every way been proved , it was not at the time an unnatural or an inexcusable piece of folly ."
Look !
She was warmly gratified -- and in another moment still more so , by a little movement of more than common friendliness on his part .-- He took her hand ;-- whether she had not herself made the first motion , she could not say -- she might , perhaps , have rather offered it -- but he took her hand , pressed it , and certainly was on the point of carrying it to his lips -- when , from some fancy or other , he suddenly let it go .-- Why he should feel such a scruple , why he should change his mind when it was all but done , she could not perceive .-- He would have judged better , she thought , if he had not stopped .-- The intention , however , was indubitable ; and whether it was that his manners had in general so little gallantry , or however else it happened , but she thought nothing became him more .-- It was with him , of so simple , yet so dignified a nature .-- She could not but recall the attempt with great satisfaction .
Mr . Elton must smile less , and Mr . John Knightley more , to fit them for the place .-- Emma only might be as nature prompted , and shew herself just as happy as she was .
I cannot help thinking , in short , that means might have been found .
A charming place , undoubtedly .
And she , " Only to be sure it was paying him too great a compliment , but she did think there were some looks a little like Mr .
He had been sitting with her , it appeared , most companionably at home , till her usual hour of exercise ; and on being desired to chuse their walk , immediately fixed on Highbury .--" He did not doubt there being very pleasant walks in every direction , but if left to him , he should always chuse the same .
Marianne was silent ; it was impossible for her to say what she did not feel , however trivial the occasion ; and upon Elinor therefore the whole task of telling lies when politeness required it , always fell .
yes -- did not you know ?-- Well , well , never mind ."
" I did not know ," said she , " that you were even acquainted till the other day ."
do not tell _me_ .
" Oh !
Her power with him was gone for ever .
What a blessing to young people to be in such hands !
But ," ( checking himself ), " you will not think it a good place , for yours were always kept in the butler ' s room .
He wanted to animate her curiosity again as to how and where he could have heard her formerly praised ; wanted very much to be gratified by more solicitation ; but the charm was broken : he found that the heat and animation of a public room was necessary to kindle his modest cousin ' s vanity ; he found , at least , that it was not to be done now , by any of those attempts which he could hazard among the too - commanding claims of the others .
Surely this must be calm enough .
Though it was rather desirable that Mr and Mrs Musgrove should be previously alarmed by some share of delay ; yet the time required by the Uppercross horses to take them back , would be a dreadful extension of suspense ; and Captain Wentworth proposed , and Charles Musgrove agreed , that it would be much better for him to take a chaise from the inn , and leave Mr Musgrove ' s carriage and horses to be sent home the next morning early , when there would be the farther advantage of sending an account of Louisa ' s night .
" If it were admissible to contradict a lady ," said the gallant Mr . Elton --
A moment ' s reflection shewed her the mistake she had been under .
She had resolution enough to pursue her own will in spite of her brother , but not enough to refrain from unreasonable regrets at that brother ' s unreasonable anger , nor from missing the luxuries of her former home .
Anne was tenderness itself , and she had the full worth of it in Captain Wentworth ' s affection .
" Did you tell her that you should soon return ?"
" Our dear Willoughby is now some miles from Barton , Elinor ," said she , as she sat down to work , " and with how heavy a heart does he travel ?"
I am going home ."
The mistake had been slight .
" Oh !
The morning of the interesting day arrived , and Mrs . Weston ' s faithful pupil did not forget either at ten , or eleven , or twelve o ' clock , that she was to think of her at four .
Anne ," cried her sister , " you can talk of nothing but beaux ;-- you will make Miss Dashwood believe you think of nothing else ."
Circumstances that might swell to half an hour ' s relation , and contained multiplied proofs to her who had seen them , had passed undiscerned by her who now heard them ; but the two latest occurrences to be mentioned , the two of strongest promise to Harriet , were not without some degree of witness from Emma herself .-- The first , was his walking with her apart from the others , in the lime - walk at Donwell , where they had been walking some time before Emma came , and he had taken pains ( as she was convinced ) to draw her from the rest to himself -- and at first , he had talked to her in a more particular way than he had ever done before , in a very particular way indeed !--( Harriet could not recall it without a blush .)
He had not the power of accepting it .
The situation of Barton , in a county so far distant from Sussex as Devonshire , which , but a few hours before , would have been a sufficient objection to outweigh every possible advantage belonging to the place , was now its first recommendation .
We all know the difference between the pronouns he or she and thou , the plainest spoken amongst us ; we all feel the influence of a something beyond common civility in our personal intercourse with each other -- a something more early implanted .
cried Louisa more eagerly , and taking her sister aside , seemed to be arguing the matter warmly .
She was always quick and assured : Isabella slow and diffident .
But Charles is so positive !
That is good news however ; I will ride over tomorrow , and ask him to dinner on Thursday ."
He was to leave Bath at nine this morning , and does not come back till to - morrow ."
She made no reply .
The gipsies did not wait for the operations of justice ; they took themselves off in a hurry .
She used to be all unreserve , and to you more especially ."
I WILL be more collected -- more concise .
For ten minutes she could hear nothing but herself .
" A material difference then ," she replied --" and no doubt you were much my superior in judgment at that period of our lives ; but does not the lapse of one - and - twenty years bring our understandings a good deal nearer ?"
The touch seemed immediate .
Very much grieved and concerned -- I had flattered myself that she must be better after such a cordial as I knew had been given her in the morning ."
Sir Walter spurned the idea of its being offered in any manner ; forbad the slightest hint being dropped of his having such an intention ; and it was only on the supposition of his being spontaneously solicited by some most unexceptionable applicant , on his own terms , and as a great favour , that he would let it at all .
" Mr . Elton in love with me !-- What an idea !"
A Mrs . Knightley for them all to give way to !-- No -- Mr .
Do not put it into his head .
" You will think my question an odd one , I dare say ," said Lucy to her one day , as they were walking together from the park to the cottage --" but pray , are you personally acquainted with your sister - in - law ' s mother , Mrs .
Elinor hardly knew whether to smile or sigh at this assertion .
But Mr . Knightley is so very fine a man !"
It determined him to attempt a reconciliation , though not exactly in the manner pointed out by their brother and sister .
CHAPTER XVII
Kellynch Hall was to be let .
I know , indeed , that he is so , and , as such , wish him well .
" Poor dear fellow !"
She would not allow the presence of Lucy , nor the consciousness of some injustice towards herself , to deter her from saying that she was happy to see him , and that she had very much regretted being from home , when he called before in Berkeley Street .
If they must dance , they had better dance at Randalls .
Elinor ," she cried , " you have made me hate myself for ever .-- How barbarous have I been to you !-- you , who have been my only comfort , who have borne with me in all my misery , who have seemed to be only suffering for me !-- Is this my gratitude ?-- Is this the only return I can make you ?-- Because your merit cries out upon myself , I have been trying to do it away ."
" Well , papa , if this is not encouragement to marry , I do not know what is .
" Yes , our good Mrs . Elton .
The ladies recovered themselves first .
That it was time for every body to go , concluded the subject ; and with a short final arrangement for the next day ' s scheme , they parted .
.
When breakfast was over she walked out by herself , and wandered about the village of Allenham , indulging the recollection of past enjoyment and crying over the present reverse for the chief of the morning .
Emma doubted the truth of this sentiment .
There had been a time , Mrs Smith told her , when her spirits had nearly failed .
was an inquiry which sprung from the impatience of her mind to have something going on .
The rapid decay , the early death of a girl so young , so lovely as Marianne , must have struck a less interested person with concern .
Though condemning her for the past , and considering it with high and unjust resentment , though perfectly careless of her , and though becoming attached to another , still he could not see her suffer , without the desire of giving her relief .
He felt the disappointment of the young man , and was mortified to have been the means of promoting it , by the sanction he had given ; and the part which he was persuaded Emma had taken in the affair , was provoking him exceedingly .
What am I to do ?"
The subjects of which her heart had been full on leaving Kellynch , and which she had felt slighted , and been compelled to smother among the Musgroves , were now become but of secondary interest .
The difference in that respect of Richmond and London was enough to make the whole difference of seeing him always and seeing him never .
Mr . Knightley and Harriet !-- It was an odd tete - a - tete ; but she was glad to see it .-- There had been a time when he would have scorned her as a companion , and turned from her with little ceremony .
Elinor blushed for the insincerity of Edward ' s future wife , and replied , " This compliment would effectually frighten me from giving any opinion on the subject had I formed one .
Mrs . Jennings laughed again , but Elinor had not spirits to say more , and eager at all events to know what Willoughby had written , hurried away to their room , where , on opening the door , she saw Marianne stretched on the bed , almost choked by grief , one letter in her hand , and two or three others laying by her .
Edward was now fixed at the cottage at least for a week ;-- for whatever other claims might be made on him , it was impossible that less than a week should be given up to the enjoyment of Elinor ' s company , or suffice to say half that was to be said of the past , the present , and the future ;-- for though a very few hours spent in the hard labor of incessant talking will despatch more subjects than can really be in common between any two rational creatures , yet with lovers it is different .
He was no dancer in general .
" Long a time , indeed !"
" You talk a great deal of the length of this passage , my dear .
It is a sort of pain , too , which is new to me .
They would be estimated very differently by others as well as myself ; Mr . Martin may be the richest of the two , but he is undoubtedly her inferior as to rank in society .-- The sphere in which she moves is much above his .-- It would be a degradation ."
To this determination she was the more easily reconciled , by recollecting that Edward Ferrars , by Lucy ' s account , was not to be in town before February ; and that their visit , without any unreasonable abridgement , might be previously finished .
If , however , I am allowed to think that you and yours feel an interest in my fate and actions , it may be the means -- it may put me on my guard -- at least , it may be something to live for .
" And I do assure you , ma ' am ," pursued Mrs Croft , " that nothing can exceed the accommodations of a man - of - war ; I speak , you know , of the higher rates .
She had rather play .
The cruelty of Mrs . Jennings no language , within her reach in her moments of happiest eloquence , could have expressed ; and now she could reproach her only by the tears which streamed from her eyes with passionate violence -- a reproach , however , so entirely lost on its object , that after many expressions of pity , she withdrew , still referring her to the letter of comfort .
I am in very good anchorage here ," ( smiling at Anne ,) " well supplied , and want for nothing .
She was the last , excepting the little boys at the cottage , she was the very last , the only remaining one of all that had filled and animated both houses , of all that had given Uppercross its cheerful character .
Mrs . Weston and Emma tried earnestly to cheer him and turn his attention from his son - in - law , who was pursuing his triumph rather unfeelingly .
I have heard him say that he could listen to her for ever .
" Upon my soul ," he added , " I believe it is nothing more ; and so I often tell my mother , when she is grieving about it .
" MY DEAR MADAM ,
But it was not a merely selfish caution , under which she acted , in putting an end to it .
To retreat was impossible .
He was only wrong in accepting the attentions ( for accepting must be the word ) of two young women at once .
She had a moment ' s fear of Miss Bates keeping away from her .
" My dear Emma , I have told you what led me to think of it .
The prospect in front was more extensive ; it commanded the whole of the valley , and reached into the country beyond .
Whether he would have proceeded farther was left to Anne ' s imagination to ponder over in a calmer hour ; for while still hearing the sounds he had uttered , she was startled to other subjects by Henrietta , eager to make use of the present leisure for getting out , and calling on her companions to lose no time , lest somebody else should come in .
The surprise of finding himself almost alone with Anne Elliot , deprived his manners of their usual composure : he started , and could only say , " I thought the Miss Musgroves had been here : Mrs Musgrove told me I should find them here ," before he walked to the window to recollect himself , and feel how he ought to behave .
" Handsome !
CHAPTER 50
I meant to take them over to John Saunders the first thing I did , but something or other hindered me all the morning ; first one thing , then another , there is no saying what , you know .
returned Mr . Knightley , with energy .
" Certainly ," answered Elinor , without knowing what she said ; but after a moment ' s reflection , she added , with revived security of Edward ' s honour and love , and her companion ' s falsehood --" Engaged to Mr . Edward Ferrars !-- I confess myself so totally surprised at what you tell me , that really -- I beg your pardon ; but surely there must be some mistake of person or name .
Anne saw them wherever she went .
Elizabeth did not quite equal her father in personal contentment .
" I am so glad to see you !"
She was not much deceived as to her own skill either as an artist or a musician , but she was not unwilling to have others deceived , or sorry to know her reputation for accomplishment often higher than it deserved .
But she had an almost instant doubt of his caring for her as he had done , of his feeling the same tenderness in the same degree .
" Poor Elinor !
-- and as clearly heard Emma opposing it with eager laughing warmth .
" Dirty , sir !
His visit afforded her but a very partial satisfaction , while his own enjoyment in it appeared so imperfect .
Elinor ," said John , " your reasoning is very good , but it is founded on ignorance of human nature .
Chapter 13
They have no indoors man , else they do not want for any thing ; and Mrs . Martin talks of taking a boy another year ."
She heard Miss Bates ' s voice , something was to be done in a hurry ; the maid looked frightened and awkward ; hoped she would be pleased to wait a moment , and then ushered her in too soon .
" Mr . Knightley and Jane Fairfax !"
A Miss Hawkins of Bath .
His heart was now open to Elinor , all its weaknesses , all its errors confessed , and his first boyish attachment to Lucy treated with all the philosophic dignity of twenty - four .
Under that peculiar sort of dry , blunt manner , I know you have the warmest heart .
" It is charming weather for THEM indeed ," she continued , as she sat down to the breakfast table with a happy countenance .
I want you to save yourself from greater pain .
Her skin was very brown , but , from its transparency , her complexion was uncommonly brilliant ; her features were all good ; her smile was sweet and attractive ; and in her eyes , which were very dark , there was a life , a spirit , an eagerness , which could hardily be seen without delight .
The move began ; and Miss Bates might be heard from that moment , without interruption , till her being seated at table and taking up her spoon .
" Quite seasonable ; and extremely fortunate we may think ourselves that it did not begin yesterday , and prevent this day ' s party , which it might very possibly have done , for Mr . Woodhouse would hardly have ventured had there been much snow on the ground ; but now it is of no consequence .
Harriet was a little distressed -- did look a little foolish at first : but having once owned that she had been presumptuous and silly , and self - deceived , before , her pain and confusion seemed to die away with the words , and leave her without a care for the past , and with the fullest exultation in the present and future ; for , as to her friend ' s approbation , Emma had instantly removed every fear of that nature , by meeting her with the most unqualified congratulations .-- Harriet was most happy to give every particular of the evening at Astley ' s , and the dinner the next day ; she could dwell on it all with the utmost delight .
" He was four - and - twenty the 8th of last June , and my birthday is the 23rd just a fortnight and a day ' s difference -- which is very odd ."
I hope he will come tonight .
" Never mind , Harriet , I shall not be a poor old maid ; and it is poverty only which makes celibacy contemptible to a generous public !
The wonder was , how any family upon earth could bear with the inconvenience of its opening as it did , so long !
They were stopping , however , in the first place at Mrs . Bates ' s ; whose house was a little nearer Randalls than Ford ' s ; and had all but knocked , when Emma caught their eye .-- Immediately they crossed the road and came forward to her ; and the agreeableness of yesterday ' s engagement seemed to give fresh pleasure to the present meeting .
I really think they ought .
No ; he was talking to Mrs . Cole -- he was looking on unconcerned ; Jane was asked by somebody else , and he was still talking to Mrs . Cole .
Facts shall speak .
She checked herself just in time .
But one must not expect every thing ; though I suppose it would be no difficult matter to widen them .
why does he not look at me ?
I never could comprehend how Mr . Weston could part with him .
She was very feverish and had a bad sore throat : Mrs . Goddard was full of care and affection , Mr . Perry was talked of , and Harriet herself was too ill and low to resist the authority which excluded her from this delightful engagement , though she could not speak of her loss without many tears .
Mrs Smith did not want to take blame to herself , and was most tender of throwing any on her husband ; but Anne could collect that their income had never been equal to their style of living , and that from the first there had been a great deal of general and joint extravagance .
She then found that it consisted of Mrs Musgrove , Henrietta , and Captain Harville , beside their two selves .
I did not even know , till I understood his design , that the living was vacant ; nor had it ever occurred to me that he might have had such a living in his gift .
Let me return your congratulations .-- I assure you that I have heard the news with the warmest interest and satisfaction .-- He is a man whom I cannot presume to praise ."
It was evident that the gentleman , ( completely a gentleman in manner ) admired her exceedingly .
Harriet was not insensible of manner ; she had voluntarily noticed her father ' s gentleness with admiration as well as wonder .
I always fetch the letters when I am here .
Knightley !-- How she could dare to fancy herself the chosen of such a man till actually assured of it !-- But Harriet was less humble , had fewer scruples than formerly .-- Her inferiority , whether of mind or situation , seemed little felt .-- She had seemed more sensible of Mr . Elton ' s being to stoop in marrying her , than she now seemed of Mr .
" Shall we see you tomorrow to dinner ?"
Another momentary vexation occurred .
The Crofts must be in Bath !
I should not mind walking half the way .
It was very wrong of me , you know , to keep any remembrances , after he was married .
" Miss Fairfax , I suppose , though you were not aware of it , had been making up her mind the whole day ?"
What will he be doing , in fact , but what very many of our first families have done , or ought to do ?
It was the end of an old pencil ,-- the part without any lead .
You could not have gratified me more than by expressing an interest --.
Encouraged by this to a further examination of his opinions , she proceeded to question him on the subject of books ; her favourite authors were brought forward and dwelt upon with so rapturous a delight , that any young man of five and twenty must have been insensible indeed , not to become an immediate convert to the excellence of such works , however disregarded before .
" Yes , a little -- not much ."
Never was a better sloop than the Asp in her day .
But now she is of age and may choose for herself ; and a pretty choice she has made !-- What now ," after pausing a moment --" your poor sister is gone to her own room , I suppose , to moan by herself .
Not a creature knowing it but themselves -- neither the Campbells , nor her family , nor his .-- It is so wonderful , that though perfectly convinced of the fact , it is yet almost incredible to myself .
It soon appeared that London was not the place for her .
I did not see it to advantage , for nothing could be more forlorn than the furniture ,-- but if it were newly fitted up -- a couple of hundred pounds , Willoughby says , would make it one of the pleasantest summer - rooms in England ."
The manner , perhaps , may have as little to recommend them .
I am sure you must have been struck by his awkward look and abrupt manner , and the uncouthness of a voice which I heard to be wholly unmodulated as I stood here ."
" Miss Dashwood , for half an hour -- for ten minutes -- I entreat you to stay ."
The events of this evening were not very remarkable .
She had received a very recent proof of its impartiality .-- How shocked had he been by her behaviour to Miss Bates !
He admires as a lover , not as a connoisseur .
papa -- that is what you never have been able to accomplish , and I do not think you ever will .
Everybody ' s heart is open , you know , when they have recently escaped from severe pain , or are recovering the blessing of health , and Nurse Rooke thoroughly understands when to speak .
An interval of meditation , serious and grateful , was the best corrective of everything dangerous in such high - wrought felicity ; and she went to her room , and grew steadfast and fearless in the thankfulness of her enjoyment .
Yet , he must leave them at the end of a week , in spite of their wishes and his own , and without any restraint on his time .
Please to destroy my scrawls -- but the ring with my hair you are very welcome to keep ."
But it would have broke MY heart , had I loved him , to hear him read with so little sensibility .
John Knightley came ; but Mr . Weston was unexpectedly summoned to town and must be absent on the very day .
" I have the greatest pleasure , my dear Emma , in forwarding to you the enclosed .
No , I believe you capable of everything great and good in your married lives .
" Indeed !
I shall have done in five minutes ."
The whole country about them abounded in beautiful walks .
Dorsetshire !
They must not over - salt the leg ; and then , if it is not over - salted , and if it is very thoroughly boiled , just as Serle boils ours , and eaten very moderately of , with a boiled turnip , and a little carrot or parsnip , I do not consider it unwholesome ."
But hardly were they so settled , when the door opened again , and Captain Wentworth walked in alone .
" Ah !
I have erred against every common - place notion of decorum ; I have been open and sincere where I ought to have been reserved , spiritless , dull , and deceitful -- had I talked only of the weather and the roads , and had I spoken only once in ten minutes , this reproach would have been spared ."
" No -- It will not be worth while .
Her sister ' s earnest , though gentle persuasion , however , soon softened her to compliance , and Elinor saw her lay her aching head on the pillow , and as she hoped , in a way to get some quiet rest before she left her .
She was a fine woman , had had a decent education , was brought forward by some cousins , thrown by chance into Mr Elliot ' s company , and fell in love with him ; and not a difficulty or a scruple was there on his side , with respect to her birth .
On that article , truth seemed attainable .
" This is beyond every thing !"
Oh !
they were infinitely worse .
" Fifteen years !
Chapter 7
" That will do ," said he , when it was finished , thinking aloud -- " you have sung quite enough for one evening -- now be quiet ."
With the greatest respect , and the warmest friendship , do I mention Miss Woodhouse ; my father perhaps will think I ought to add , with the deepest humiliation .-- A few words which dropped from him yesterday spoke his opinion , and some censure I acknowledge myself liable to .-- My behaviour to Miss Woodhouse indicated , I believe , more than it ought .-- In order to assist a concealment so essential to me , I was led on to make more than an allowable use of the sort of intimacy into which we were immediately thrown .-- I cannot deny that Miss Woodhouse was my ostensible object -- but I am sure you will believe the declaration , that had I not been convinced of her indifference , I would not have been induced by any selfish views to go on .-- Amiable and delightful as Miss Woodhouse is , she never gave me the idea of a young woman likely to be attached ; and that she was perfectly free from any tendency to being attached to me , was as much my conviction as my wish .-- She received my attentions with an easy , friendly , goodhumoured playfulness , which exactly suited me .
If I could but have kept longer away !"
She was evidently displeased ; looked up , and seeing herself watched , blushed more deeply than he had ever perceived her , and saying only , " I did not know that proper names were allowed ," pushed away the letters with even an angry spirit , and looked resolved to be engaged by no other word that could be offered .
It is downright labour to him where ladies are concerned .
" What poor Mrs . Ferrars suffered , when first Fanny broke it to her , is not to be described .
I wish Jane Fairfax very well ; but she tires me to death ."
I have frequently thought that I must have been intended by nature to be fond of low company , I am so little at my ease among strangers of gentility !"
Nothing occurred during the next three or four days , to make Elinor regret what she had done , in applying to her mother ; for Willoughby neither came nor wrote .
Miss Anne , I cannot help wishing Mrs Charles had a little of your method with those children .
That was what happened before tea .
I must do THIS justice to Mr . Willoughby -- he has broken no positive engagement with my sister ."
" Is mama coming ?--"
( turning to Mrs . Dashwood ) but you have made it so charming !
I never saw anybody in my life spell harder for an invitation .
But ," ( in a deep tone ,) " it was not done for her .
" Indeed ," replied Elinor , " I believe that you will find him , on farther acquaintance , all that you have heard him to be , and as you will be such very near neighbours ( for I understand the parsonage is almost close to the mansion - house ,) it is particularly important that he SHOULD be all this ."
Your home , country , friends , all quitted .
" Upon my word , I am not acquainted with the minutiae of her principles .
" A little .
I have entered many a shop to avoid your sight , as the carriage drove by .
" If he could stay only a couple of days , he ought to come ; and one can hardly conceive a young man ' s not having it in his power to do as much as that .
Our own library is too well known to me , to be resorted to for any thing beyond mere amusement .
As for _his_ going , Emma did not wish him to think it possible , the hours would be too late , and the party too numerous .
Such a beginning as this cannot be followed by any thing .-- Do not let me be pained by hearing any thing more on the subject ."
When you are tired of eating strawberries in the garden , there shall be cold meat in the house ."
Miniatures , half - lengths , whole - lengths , pencil , crayon , and water - colours had been all tried in turn .
The lovers were standing together at one of the windows .
Elinor was disappointed too ; but at the same time her regard for Colonel Brandon ensured his welcome with her ; and she felt particularly hurt that a man so partial to her sister should perceive that she experienced nothing but grief and disappointment in seeing him .
Weston ."
Granted ;-- for private enjoyment ; and for private enjoyment keep them .
Oh no ; we all felt that we were going to be only half a mile apart , and were sure of meeting every day ."
Excepting inequality of fortune , and perhaps a little disparity of age , I can see nothing unsuitable ."
They are all remarkably clever ; and they have so many pretty ways .
The weather does not look well , and grandmama will be uneasy .
" Oh !
" And -- were you much acquainted ?"
Not so the Miss Steeles .-- They came from Exeter , well provided with admiration for the use of Sir John Middleton , his family , and all his relations , and no niggardly proportion was now dealt out to his fair cousins , whom they declared to be the most beautiful , elegant , accomplished , and agreeable girls they had ever beheld , and with whom they were particularly anxious to be better acquainted .-- And to be better acquainted therefore , Elinor soon found was their inevitable lot , for as Sir John was entirely on the side of the Miss Steeles , their party would be too strong for opposition , and that kind of intimacy must be submitted to , which consists of sitting an hour or two together in the same room almost every day .
He had thought her wretchedly altered , and in the first moment of appeal , had spoken as he felt .
" Jane Fairfax has feeling ," said Mr . Knightley --" I do not accuse her of want of feeling .
She felt that she could so much more depend upon the sincerity of those who sometimes looked or said a careless or a hasty thing , than of those whose presence of mind never varied , whose tongue never slipped .
He was so busy the last time he was at Kingston that he quite forgot it , but he goes again to - morrow .
And Miss Bates was obliged to give a direct answer before he would hear her in any thing else .
In fact , as I have long been convinced , though every profession is necessary and honourable in its turn , it is only the lot of those who are not obliged to follow any , who can live in a regular way , in the country , choosing their own hours , following their own pursuits , and living on their own property , without the torment of trying for more ; it is only their lot , I say , to hold the blessings of health and a good appearance to the utmost : I know no other set of men but what lose something of their personableness when they cease to be quite young ."
But the effort was painful .
" With a great deal of pleasure , sir , at any time ," said Mr . Knightley , laughing , " and I agree with you entirely , that it will be a much better thing .
Her wish of shewing you attention could not be doubted , and his being a disengaged and social man makes it all easy .
No difficulty arose on either side in the agreement ; and she waited only for the disposal of her effects at Norland , and to determine her future household , before she set off for the west ; and this , as she was exceedingly rapid in the performance of everything that interested her , was soon done .-- The horses which were left her by her husband had been sold soon after his death , and an opportunity now offering of disposing of her carriage , she agreed to sell that likewise at the earnest advice of her eldest daughter .
" There might be scruples of delicacy , my dear Emma .
I have more than half an expectation of our all going abroad .
CHAPTER VII
Music seems scarcely to attract him , and though he admires Elinor ' s drawings very much , it is not the admiration of a person who can understand their worth .
" I hope you did not venture far , Miss Fairfax , this morning , or I am sure you must have been wet .-- We scarcely got home in time .
" Then pray stay at Richmond ."
The Admiral does not seem very ill , and I sincerely hope Bath will do him all the good he wants .
" To - morrow , Marianne !"
THESE assured him that his exertion had produced an increase of good - will towards himself , and THESE gave Elinor hopes of its being farther augmented hereafter ; but Mrs . Jennings , who knew nothing of all this , who knew only that the Colonel continued as grave as ever , and that she could neither prevail on him to make the offer himself , nor commission her to make it for him , began , at the end of two days , to think that , instead of Midsummer , they would not be married till Michaelmas , and by the end of a week that it would not be a match at all .
To you , he will talk of farming ; to me , of drawing or music ; and so on to every body , having that general information on all subjects which will enable him to follow the lead , or take the lead , just as propriety may require , and to speak extremely well on each ; that is my idea of him ."
She could not think of much else on the 29th of September ; and she had this sympathetic touch in the evening from Mary , who , on having occasion to note down the day of the month , exclaimed , " Dear me , is not this the day the Crofts were to come to Kellynch ?
No , it was not to be supposed that Lady Russell would perceive him till they were nearly opposite .
For a few moments every one was silent .
" Not till the reserve ceases towards oneself ; and then the attraction may be the greater .
" Did not you know ," said Willoughby , " that we had been out in my curricle ?"
CHAPTER XIV
Mr . Dixon , you say , is not , strictly speaking , handsome ?"
She was answered in the negative .
Mrs Clay , who had been present while all this passed , now thought it advisable to leave the room , and Anne could have said much , and did long to say a little in defence of her friend ' s not very dissimilar claims to theirs , but her sense of personal respect to her father prevented her .
He dismounted , and giving his horse to his servant , walked back with them to Barton , whither he was purposely coming to visit them .
They are not at all nice children , in my opinion ; but Mrs Musgrove seems to like them quite as well , if not better , than her grandchildren .
yes ; certainly ."
They are excellent neighbours to you in the country , I understand ."
This is in the supposition of his attachment continuing what it now is ; but I do not know that I expect it will ; I do not look upon him to be quite the sort of man -- I do not altogether build upon his steadiness or constancy .-- His feelings are warm , but I can imagine them rather changeable .-- Every consideration of the subject , in short , makes me thankful that my happiness is not more deeply involved .-- I shall do very well again after a little while -- and then , it will be a good thing over ; for they say every body is in love once in their lives , and I shall have been let off easily ."
" Dear , dear Norland ," said Elinor , " probably looks much as it always does at this time of the year .
" It is too small -- wants strength .
" You will excuse my being so much over - powered .
One five minutes brought a note , the next a parcel ; and Anne had not been there half an hour , when their dining - room , spacious as it was , seemed more than half filled : a party of steady old friends were seated around Mrs Musgrove , and Charles came back with Captains Harville and Wentworth .
Wickedness is always wickedness , but folly is not always folly .-- It depends upon the character of those who handle it .
" You have not been able to bring your sister over to your plan of general civility ," said Edward to Elinor , " Do you gain no ground ?"
He had been to several families that morning in hopes of procuring some addition to their number , but it was moonlight and every body was full of engagements .
They were evidently in excellent spirits , and she was soon to listen to the causes .
She did most heartily grieve over the idleness of her childhood -- and sat down and practised vigorously an hour and a half .
The prospect of four thousand a - year , in addition to his present income , besides the remaining half of his own mother ' s fortune , warmed his heart , and made him feel capable of generosity .-- " Yes , he would give them three thousand pounds : it would be liberal and handsome !
" Between Mr . Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax ?
She wanted to be of use to her ; wanted to shew a value for her society , and testify respect and consideration .
She coloured deeply , and he recollected himself and moved away .
Do promise me ."
He acquiesced in all her decisions , caught all her enthusiasm ; and long before his visit concluded , they conversed with the familiarity of a long - established acquaintance .
No , I would not be the means of giving them any pain .
" I am here on no business of my own ," said Emma ; " I am only waiting for my friend .
The tone implied some old acquaintance -- and how could she possibly guess ?
Perry ."
Anne presumed , however , still to smile about it , and at last to mention " Elizabeth ."
Her admiration and regard , even her sisterly regard , was all his own ; but he was a lover ; his attentions were wholly Marianne ' s , and a far less agreeable man might have been more generally pleasing .
They owed to him their two or three politest puzzles ; and the joy and exultation with which at last he recalled , and rather sentimentally recited , that well - known charade ,
" Come Miss Woodhouse , Miss Otway , Miss Fairfax , what are you all doing ?-- Come Emma , set your companions the example .
What an ill - natured woman his mother is , an ' t she ?
Lucy directly drew her work table near her and reseated herself with an alacrity and cheerfulness which seemed to infer that she could taste no greater delight than in making a filigree basket for a spoilt child .
" You will not like him , I will answer for it ."
So that , in fact , you see , if people do but know how to set about it , every comfort may be as well enjoyed in a cottage as in the most spacious dwelling ."
Her departure , therefore , was fixed on ; and within an hour after Mr . Harris ' s arrival , she set off , with her little boy and his nurse , for the house of a near relation of Mr . Palmer ' s , who lived a few miles on the other side of Bath ; whither her husband promised , at her earnest entreaty , to join her in a day or two ; and whither she was almost equally urgent with her mother to accompany her .
They must not do less than others , or she should be exposed to odious suspicions , and imagined capable of pitiful resentment .
Lively as he was , it seemed a liveliness that did not satisfy himself ; but what decided her belief on the subject , was his staying only a quarter of an hour , and hurrying away to make other calls in Highbury .
I can safely say I owe you no ill - will , and am sure you will be too generous to do us any ill offices .
He knows the value of a good income as well as any body .
Thus much indeed he was obliged to acknowledge : that he had been constant unconsciously , nay unintentionally ; that he had meant to forget her , and believed it to be done .
of Mr .
The scene enlarged ; two persons appeared ; Mrs . Weston and her son - in - law ; they were walking into Highbury ;-- to Hartfield of course .
But why should you be cruel ?
With my head and heart full of your sister , I was forced to play the happy lover to another woman !-- Those three or four weeks were worse than all .
You will have my sketches , some time or other , to look at -- or my tour to read -- or my poem .
Mrs . Jennings asked her , as soon as she appeared , if she had not been to Allenham ; and Mrs . Palmer laughed so heartily at the question , as to show she understood it .
Chapter 3
She would be such a delightful companion for Emma ."
They were entering the hall .
" Most favourably for his nephew -- gave his consent with scarcely a difficulty .
very well done indeed !
" Very odd !
Certainly I had been accustomed to every luxury at Maple Grove ; but I did assure him that two carriages were not necessary to my happiness , nor were spacious apartments .
He is of no profession at all ."
He had been most agreeable , most delightful ; he had told Harriet that he had seen them go by , and had purposely followed them ; other little gallantries and allusions had been dropt , but nothing serious .
There was only Harriet , who seemed not in spirits herself , fagged , and very willing to be silent ; and Emma felt the tears running down her cheeks almost all the way home , without being at any trouble to check them , extraordinary as they were .
And Jane will have such another .
I like a job of that sort excessively .'
In a few minutes the carriage returned .-- Somebody talked of rain .-- " I will see that there are umbrellas , sir ," said Frank to his father : " Miss Bates must not be forgotten :" and away he went .
I shall not stop .
" Those who knew any thing about it , must have felt the difference .
cried Miss Bates .
They could think of no one else .
After a little more discourse in praise of gruel , with some wondering at its not being taken every evening by every body , he proceeded to say , with an air of grave reflection ,
But at length she was secured by the exertions of Elinor , who greatly disapproved such continual seclusion .
" But , if I know myself ," said he , " this is from no want of gallantry towards them .
Elinor started at this declaration , and was sorry for the warmth she had been betrayed into , in speaking of him .
His name was good , his residence was in their favourite village , and she soon found out that of all manly dresses a shooting - jacket was the most becoming .
" Oh , dear ," cried Harriet , " now I recollect what you mean ; but I was thinking of something very different at the time .
she was not so easily to be talked out of it .
Mr . Weston would not be blind to folly , though in his own son ; but he is very likely to have a more yielding , complying , mild disposition than would suit your notions of man ' s perfection .
" How strange this is !
He and I had a great deal of talk about it ; and the best of all is , that he is gone back again to Harley Street , that he may be within call when Mrs . Ferrars is told of it , for she was sent for as soon as ever my cousins left the house , for your sister was sure SHE would be in hysterics too ; and so she may , for what I care .
-- thought Emma .--" You have not deserved this .
" Is there a felicity in the world ," said Marianne , " superior to this ?-- Margaret , we will walk here at least two hours ."
He repeated the inquiry with yet greater eagerness .
I thought -- but I beg your pardon , perhaps I have been under a mistake .
Do not let us be too solemn on the business .
I assure you mine are very different .
They read , they talked , they sang together ; his musical talents were considerable ; and he read with all the sensibility and spirit which Edward had unfortunately wanted .
Mr . Knightley ' s eyes had preceded Miss Bates ' s in a glance at Jane .
Had I died ,-- in what peculiar misery should I have left you , my nurse , my friend , my sister !-- You , who had seen all the fretful selfishness of my latter days ; who had known all the murmurings of my heart !-- How should I have lived in YOUR remembrance !-- My mother too !
" And what sort of a young man is he ?"
How improperly had she been acting by Harriet !
" Then you would not have me tell it to Lucy , for I think of going as far as Holborn to - day ."
Mr . Weston seems an excellent creature -- quite a first - rate favourite with me already , I assure you .
" And who is Miss Williams ?"
This of course made every body laugh ; and Elinor tried to laugh too .
There was no recovering Miss Taylor -- nor much likelihood of ceasing to pity her ; but a few weeks brought some alleviation to Mr . Woodhouse .
He had enquired after her , she found , particularly ; had expressed his hope of Miss Elliot ' s not being the worse for her exertions , and had spoken of those exertions as great .
There had been the charm .
The former was for Sir John ' s gratification , the latter for that of his lady .
If one happens only to shut the door a little hard , she starts and wriggles like a young dab - chick in the water ; and Benwick sits at her elbow , reading verses , or whispering to her , all day long ."
She thanked him again and again ; and , with a sweetness of address which always attended her , invited him to be seated .
said he , in a low voice , to Miss Dashwood , by whom he was sitting .
It does not do him justice , to be sure , but yet I think you cannot be deceived as to the person it was drew for .-- I have had it above these three years ."
he was surprised at that ;" and added , " certainly you cannot do better than to continue as you are ; you cannot be better than well ; or I should recommend Gowland , the constant use of Gowland , during the spring months .
That is too young to settle .
They seem very comfortable as they are , and if she were to take any pains to marry him , she would probably repent it .
In such employments as these they were interrupted soon after breakfast the next day by the entrance of their landlord , who called to welcome them to Barton , and to offer them every accommodation from his own house and garden in which theirs might at present be deficient .
said Elinor .
I am quite of your opinion .
I was startled , I confess , by the alteration in his manners this morning ;-- he did not speak like himself , and did not return your kindness with any cordiality .
" I wish ," said Mrs . Weston , " one could know which arrangement our guests in general would like best .
" I shall not give you any advice , Harriet .
This is the simple truth ."
His looks shewing him not pained , but pleased with this allusion to his situation , she was emboldened to go on ; and feeling in herself the right of seniority of mind , she ventured to recommend a larger allowance of prose in his daily study ; and on being requested to particularize , mentioned such works of our best moralists , such collections of the finest letters , such memoirs of characters of worth and suffering , as occurred to her at the moment as calculated to rouse and fortify the mind by the highest precepts , and the strongest examples of moral and religious endurances .
" Oh !
" She said he was very agreeable the day he dined there .
Happily for her , they were not many .
At last it was all settled , even to the destination of the parcel .
I have been making a duplicate of the catalogue of my father ' s books and pictures .
To be sure , your brother and sister will ask you to come to them ."
" I thought you were both in Devonshire ," said he .
Yours affectionately ,
" Oh !
I was prepared to meet you with the pleasure which our separation naturally produced , with the familiarity which our intimacy at Barton appeared to me to justify .
He will find an _addition_ to the society of Highbury when he comes again ; that is , if I may presume to call myself an addition .
I am exceedingly obliged to you , Mrs . Elton , I am obliged to any body who feels for me , but I am quite serious in wishing nothing to be done till the summer .
I know he was invited and encouraged , and I know he did not choose to go .
But now , poor girl , her peace is cut up for some time .
" Open the windows !-- but surely , Mr . Churchill , nobody would think of opening the windows at Randalls .
but what shall you do ?
But his spirits were soon rising again , and with laughing eyes , after mentioning the expected return of the Campbells , he named the name of Dixon .-- Emma blushed , and forbade its being pronounced in her hearing .
True , upon my honour !
I have heard him speak with great animation of a large family of young ladies that his sisters are intimate with , who have all twenty thousand pounds apiece ."
.
He will be glad to hear it ."
" Yes , he has been gone just four weeks , as you observe , Miss Woodhouse ," said Miss Bates , " four weeks yesterday .-- A Miss Hawkins !-- Well , I had always rather fancied it would be some young lady hereabouts ; not that I ever -- Mrs . Cole once whispered to me -- but I immediately said , ` No , Mr . Elton is a most worthy young man -- but '-- In short , I do not think I am particularly quick at those sort of discoveries .
" Very well -- and as Randalls , I suppose , is not likely to have less influence than heretofore , it strikes me as a possible thing , Emma , that Henry and John may be sometimes in the way .
The Kellynch estate should be transmitted whole and entire , as he had received it .
His choice of subjects , his expressions , and still more his manner and look , had been such as she could see in only one light .
" Upon my word ," said Emma , " I begin to doubt my having any such talent .
You blush , Harriet .-- Does any body else occur to you at this moment under such a definition ?
The elegant little clock on the mantel - piece had struck " eleven with its silver sounds ," and the watchman was beginning to be heard at a distance telling the same tale , before Mr Elliot or any of them seemed to feel that he had been there long .
I have no reason , from any thing that has fallen within my observation , to do otherwise .
" I shall be happier to burn it ," replied Harriet .
A better written letter , Harriet ( returning it ,) than I had expected ."
I have heard him express himself so warmly on those points !-- Such an admirer of her performance on the pianoforte , and of her voice !
The very circumstance , in its unpleasantest form , which they would each have been most anxious to avoid , had fallen on them .-- They were not only all three together , but were together without the relief of any other person .
They seemed to be within half a sentence of Harriet , and her immediate feeling was to avert the subject , if possible .
" Are you going back to town ?"
The acquaintance at present had no charm for her .
" Mrs . Ferrars ," added he , lowering his voice to the tone becoming so important a subject , " knows nothing about it at present , and I believe it will be best to keep it entirely concealed from her as long as may be .-- When the marriage takes place , I fear she must hear of it all ."
The estate at Winthrop is not less than two hundred and fifty acres , besides the farm near Taunton , which is some of the best land in the country .
But we never did .
Emma was extremely gratified .-- They were interrupted by the bustle of Mr . Weston calling on every body to begin dancing again .
It is a pity you cannot put your sister in the way of managing them .
This , Emma could not doubt , was all for herself .
Either from the consciousness , however , that his friend had recovered , or from other consciousness , he went no farther ; and Anne who , in spite of the agitated voice in which the latter part had been uttered , and in spite of all the various noises of the room , the almost ceaseless slam of the door , and ceaseless buzz of persons walking through , had distinguished every word , was struck , gratified , confused , and beginning to breathe very quick , and feel an hundred things in a moment .
" It has a disagreeable look to me .
It did not appear to him that Sir Walter could materially alter his style of living in a house which had such a character of hospitality and ancient dignity to support .
The friends from whom she had just parted , though very good sort of people , must be doing her harm .
It is Anne ' s own proposal , and so I shall go with you , which will be a great deal better , for I have not dined at the other house since Tuesday ."
" Now , how I do wish I understood you !
" Ah !"
Lady Russell , indeed , had scarcely any influence with Elizabeth , and seemed to love her , rather because she would love her , than because Elizabeth deserved it .
It was lucky , however , for Mrs . Jennings ' s curiosity and Elinor ' s too , that she would tell any thing WITHOUT being asked ; for nothing would otherwise have been learnt .
" You have asserted nothing contradictory to what Mr Elliot appeared to be some years ago .
Ungracious girl !
she is absolutely charming !
Emma knew that she had , but would not own it ; and Mr . Elton warmly added ,
Had both the children been there , the affair might have been determined too easily by measuring them at once ; but as Harry only was present , it was all conjectural assertion on both sides ; and every body had a right to be equally positive in their opinion , and to repeat it over and over again as often as they liked .
" Thank you , Willoughby .
In the whole of her subsequent manner , she traced the direction of a mind awakened to reasonable exertion ; for no sooner had they entered their common sitting - room , than Marianne turned her eyes around it with a look of resolute firmness , as if determined at once to accustom herself to the sight of every object with which the remembrance of Willoughby could be connected .-- She said little , but every sentence aimed at cheerfulness , and though a sigh sometimes escaped her , it never passed away without the atonement of a smile .
" Well , sir ," said Elinor , who , though pitying him , grew impatient for his departure , " and this is all ?"
" Well then , another day or two , perhaps ; but I cannot stay here long , I cannot stay to endure the questions and remarks of all these people .
They will soon be back again , and then they ' d be sure and call here ."
He approached , and addressing himself rather to Elinor than Marianne , as if wishing to avoid her eye , and determined not to observe her attitude , inquired in a hurried manner after Mrs . Dashwood , and asked how long they had been in town .
There was no triumph , no pitiful triumph in his manner .
Anne , finding she might decline it , did so , very gratefully .
Upon these occasions , a lady ' s character generally precedes her ; and Highbury has long known that you are a superior performer ."
Very happy to hear it .
I hope you will be pleased with my son ; but you must not expect a prodigy .
I hope time has not made you less willing to pardon .
She would be placed in the midst of those who loved her , and who had better sense than herself ; retired enough for safety , and occupied enough for cheerfulness .
The consequence of this , upon a mind so young , so lively , so inexperienced as Mrs . Brandon ' s , was but too natural .
We had had a great deal of trouble in persuading him to sit at all .
Mr Elliot , raised by his marriage to great affluence , and disposed to every gratification of pleasure and vanity which could be commanded without involving himself , ( for with all his self - indulgence he had become a prudent man ), and beginning to be rich , just as his friend ought to have found himself to be poor , seemed to have had no concern at all for that friend ' s probable finances , but , on the contrary , had been prompting and encouraging expenses which could end only in ruin ; and the Smiths accordingly had been ruined .
They described the drawing - room window - curtains of one of the houses on this side of the way , and this part of the street , as being the handsomest and best hung of any in Bath , but could not recollect the exact number , and I have been trying to find out which it could be ; but I confess I can see no curtains hereabouts that answer their description ."
He was so miserable when he left us at Longstaple , to go to you , that I was afraid you would think him quite ill ."
She was generous , amiable , interesting : she was everything but prudent .
Elizabeth had succeeded , at sixteen , to all that was possible , of her mother ' s rights and consequence ; and being very handsome , and very like himself , her influence had always been great , and they had gone on together most happily .
' The lock of hair , ( repeating it from the letter ,) which you so obligingly bestowed on me '-- That is unpardonable .
He looked surprised and said , " I beg your pardon , I am afraid my inquiry has been impertinent ; but I had not supposed any secrecy intended , as they openly correspond , and their marriage is universally talked of ."
" It is not actually settled , but there is such a thing in agitation .
At last he turned round again , and regarded them both ; she started up , and pronouncing his name in a tone of affection , held out her hand to him .
You will get very tired when tea is over ."
how so ?
A large bulky figure has as good a right to be in deep affliction , as the most graceful set of limbs in the world .
Did you ever see her ?
" I should not have thought it possible ," she began , " that you could have misunderstood me !
She goes into the warm bath to - morrow , and for the rest of the week , you know , we are engaged ."
" Well , she is to marry him .
He did not mean to complain , however .
" You have no confidence in me , Marianne ."
I should wish it ."
Education has been theirs in so much higher a degree ; the pen has been in their hands .
" It was not fit that you should then know how much I was the reverse !"
Were she a woman of fortune , I would leave every harmless absurdity to take its chance , I would not quarrel with you for any liberties of manner .
Not unfrequently , through Emma ' s persuasion , he had some of the chosen and the best to dine with him : but evening parties were what he preferred ; and , unless he fancied himself at any time unequal to company , there was scarcely an evening in the week in which Emma could not make up a card - table for him .
He has encouragement enough to proceed , without our sighing out our souls over this charade ."
" Mr . Elton indeed !"
But remember that the pain of parting from friends will be felt by every body at times , whatever be their education or state .
" Her daughters are both exceedingly well married , and therefore I cannot perceive the necessity of her remembering them farther .
I really must talk to him about purchasing a donkey .
" I love to be reminded of the past , Edward -- whether it be melancholy or gay , I love to recall it -- and you will never offend me by talking of former times .
" Mr . Knightley was there too , was he ?"
You never mentioned it before .
This is treating me like a friend .
" Though we have seen him once or twice at my uncle ' s , it is rather too much to pretend to know him very well ."
The Miss Dashwoods had now been rather more than two months in town , and Marianne ' s impatience to be gone increased every day .
" Ah !
Supported by the conviction of having done nothing to merit her present unhappiness , and consoled by the belief that Edward had done nothing to forfeit her esteem , she thought she could even now , under the first smart of the heavy blow , command herself enough to guard every suspicion of the truth from her mother and sisters .
Why they are your cousins , you know , after a fashion .
But I will shew her greater attention than I have done ."
He turned round on their coming in , and his countenance shewed that he strongly partook of the emotion which over - powered Marianne .
The pleasure is not enhanced , and the inconvenience is often considerable .
" I never want them , I assure you .
Very pleasant party .
Some people are surprized , I believe , that the eldest was not , but Isabella would have him called Henry , which I thought very pretty of her .
Mr . Elton , who might marry any body !
A _small_ half - glass , put into a tumbler of water ?
" But the imprudence of such a match !"
Nothing could be pleasanter .
The affection of the whole family , the warm attachment of Miss Campbell in particular , was the more honourable to each party from the circumstance of Jane ' s decided superiority both in beauty and acquirements .
The older a person grows , Harriet , the more important it is that their manners should not be bad ; the more glaring and disgusting any loudness , or coarseness , or awkwardness becomes .
and he passed his hand across his eyes , as if the remembrance were still too painful , but in a moment , half smiling again , added , " The day has produced some effects however ; has had some consequences which must be considered as the very reverse of frightful .
The servant , who saw only that Miss Marianne was taken ill , had sense enough to call one of the maids , who , with Mrs . Dashwood ' s assistance , supported her into the other room .
There was nothing like flirtation between her and her partner .
The holidays , however , are over at last : I believe no children ever had such long ones .
Elinor placed all that was astonishing in this way of acting to his mother ' s account ; and it was happy for her that he had a mother whose character was so imperfectly known to her , as to be the general excuse for every thing strange on the part of her son .
The young man had been the first admirer , but she trusted there was no other hold , and that there would be no serious difficulty , on Harriet ' s side , to oppose any friendly arrangement of her own .
Marianne was rejoiced to find her sister so easily pleased .
But I have injured more than herself ; and I have injured one , whose affection for me --( may I say it ?)
" By all means , if you can ."
Jane declined it , however , and the husband and wife walked off .
Yes , yes , I will go and see her , sure enough .
Colonel Brandon tell you of it !
Such a thought would never enter either Sir John or Lady Middleton ' s head ; and therefore very little leisure was ever given for a general chat , and none at all for particular discourse .
Lodging as I did in Bond Street , there was hardly a day in which I did not catch a glimpse of one or other of you ; and nothing but the most constant watchfulness on my side , a most invariably prevailing desire to keep out of your sight , could have separated us so long .
There was a very general ignorance of all naval matters throughout the party ; and he was very much questioned , and especially by the two Miss Musgroves , who seemed hardly to have any eyes but for him , as to the manner of living on board , daily regulations , food , hours , & c ., and their surprise at his accounts , at learning the degree of accommodation and arrangement which was practicable , drew from him some pleasant ridicule , which reminded Anne of the early days when she too had been ignorant , and she too had been accused of supposing sailors to be living on board without anything to eat , or any cook to dress it if there were , or any servant to wait , or any knife and fork to use .
" I hope I am aware that they may be too noisy for your father -- or even may be some encumbrance to you , if your visiting engagements continue to increase as much as they have done lately ."
She must not walk ."
A dinner there must be .
They were interrupted by the entrance of Margaret ; and Elinor was then at liberty to think over the representations of her mother , to acknowledge the probability of many , and hope for the justice of all .
" I love your indignation ," said he ; " it is very natural .
It may be possible to do without dancing entirely .
Emma was ready for her visitor some time before he appeared ; but if this reflected at all upon his impatience , his sorrowful look and total want of spirits when he did come might redeem him .
It has hurt his father equally .
Now Emma could , indeed , enjoy Mr . Knightley ' s visits ; now she could talk , and she could listen with true happiness , unchecked by that sense of injustice , of guilt , of something most painful , which had haunted her when remembering how disappointed a heart was near her , how much might at that moment , and at a little distance , be enduring by the feelings which she had led astray herself .
And a delightful dance it was to be .
Few people of common prudence will do THAT ; and whatever she saves , she will be able to dispose of ."
So goodby , my dear .
Emma listened with the warmest concern ; grieved for her more and more , and looked around eager to discover some way of being useful .
Well !
They are jealous even of his regard for his father .
He is , moreover , aware that she DOES disapprove the connection , he dares not therefore at present confess to her his engagement with Marianne , and he feels himself obliged , from his dependent situation , to give into her schemes , and absent himself from Devonshire for a while .
He was giving Harriet information as to modes of agriculture , etc .
" Nothing at all , I should rather suppose ; for she has only her jointure , which will descend to her children ."
But perhaps you young ladies may not care about the beaux , and had as lief be without them as with them .
Edward could only attempt an explanation by supposing , that , perhaps , at first accidentally meeting , the vanity of the one had been so worked on by the flattery of the other , as to lead by degrees to all the rest .
But her promise of relating it to her sister was invariably painful .
Scarcely a word was spoken during their return to Berkeley Street .
He thought her a most extraordinary young woman ; in her temper , manners , mind , a model of female excellence .
When the note was shown to Elinor , as it was within ten minutes after its arrival , it gave her , for the first time , some share in the expectations of Lucy ; for such a mark of uncommon kindness , vouchsafed on so short an acquaintance , seemed to declare that the good - will towards her arose from something more than merely malice against herself ; and might be brought , by time and address , to do every thing that Lucy wished .
It could not be very lasting , however .
But that won ' t do now - a - days ; nothing in the way of pleasure can ever be given up by the young men of this age ."
But this did not last long ; Elinor had hardly got their last visitors out of her head , had hardly done wondering at Charlotte ' s being so happy without a cause , at Mr . Palmer ' s acting so simply , with good abilities , and at the strange unsuitableness which often existed between husband and wife , before Sir John ' s and Mrs . Jennings ' s active zeal in the cause of society , procured her some other new acquaintance to see and observe .
We had a famous set - to at rat - hunting all the morning in my father ' s great barns ; and he played his part so well that I have liked him the better ever since ."
` Woman , lovely woman .'
They would not listen to scruples : he was obeyed ; they were all beneath his roof ; and while Louisa , under Mrs Harville ' s direction , was conveyed up stairs , and given possession of her own bed , assistance , cordials , restoratives were supplied by her husband to all who needed them .
The sounds were retreating , and Anne distinguished no more .
For the convenience of Charlotte and her child , they were to be more than two days on their journey , and Mr . Palmer , travelling more expeditiously with Colonel Brandon , was to join them at Cleveland soon after their arrival .
It could not be otherwise .
CHAPTER IV
She had been used before to feel that he could not be always quite sincere , but now she saw insincerity in everything .
Her heart was devoted to Willoughby , and the fond attachment to Norland , which she brought with her from Sussex , was more likely to be softened than she had thought it possible before , by the charms which his society bestowed on her present home .
No hurry for a signal at all .
Is not it so ?"
We cannot part ."
" You are in luck .-- Your only blunder was confined to my ear , when you imagined a certain friend of ours in love with the lady ."
A man does not recover from such a devotion of the heart to such a woman .
Among such friends , however , and such flattery , he did revive .
" They come on the Admiral ' s account .
There was no longer anything of tenderness due to him .
I have the pleasure , madam , ( to Mrs . Bates ,) of restoring your spectacles , healed for the present ."
One does not love a place the less for having suffered in it , unless it has been all suffering , nothing but suffering , which was by no means the case at Lyme .
" I am not one of those who neglect the reigning power to bow to the rising sun .
It would be difficult to say which had seen highest perfection in the other , or which had been the happiest : she , in receiving his declarations and proposals , or he in having them accepted .
Now , I cannot help thinking it a pity that he does not live entirely by the sea .
But Elinor -- how are HER feelings to be described ?-- From the moment of learning that Lucy was married to another , that Edward was free , to the moment of his justifying the hopes which had so instantly followed , she was every thing by turns but tranquil .
He had , by that time , realised an easy competence -- enough to secure the purchase of a little estate adjoining Highbury , which he had always longed for -- enough to marry a woman as portionless even as Miss Taylor , and to live according to the wishes of his own friendly and social disposition .
said he , " and who is Miss Anne Elliot to be visiting in Westgate Buildings ?
Captain Wentworth , however , came from his window , apparently not ill - disposed for conversation ; but Charles Hayter soon put an end to his attempts by seating himself near the table , and taking up the newspaper ; and Captain Wentworth returned to his window .
What was to be done ?
" I think her beautiful , quite beautiful ."
Oh !
and this , without much waiting for an answer ; or in the young ladies ' addition of , " I hope we shall be in Bath in the winter ; but remember , papa , if we do go , we must be in a good situation : none of your Queen Squares for us !"
Former provocations reappeared .
Mr . Woodhouse told me of it .
Edward assured them himself of his being in town , within a very short time , by twice calling in Berkeley Street .
Colonel Wallis declined sitting down again , and Mr Elliot was invited by Elizabeth and Miss Carteret , in a manner not to be refused , to sit between them ; and by some other removals , and a little scheming of her own , Anne was enabled to place herself much nearer the end of the bench than she had been before , much more within reach of a passer - by .
" I do not dislike him .
Only to Gay Street , or farther up the town ?"
You must grant me that ."
" Aye , I believe that will be best for her .
Ford ."
She might have prevented the indulgence and increase of such sentiments .
Harriet , here comes a very sudden trial of our stability in good thoughts .
She owned that , considering every thing , she was not absolutely without inclination for the party .
Had it been the effect of gratitude , had he learnt to love her , because he believed her to be preferring him , it would have been another thing .
My aunt always sends me off when she is shopping .
Short had been the notice -- short their meeting ; he was gone ; and Emma felt so sorry to part , and foresaw so great a loss to their little society from his absence as to begin to be afraid of being too sorry , and feeling it too much .
I am sure he was particularly silent when Mrs . Cole told us of it at dinner ."
said Sir Walter .
A variety of evils crossed his mind .
He said no more .
Their mother had nothing , and their father only seven thousand pounds in his own disposal ; for the remaining moiety of his first wife ' s fortune was also secured to her child , and he had only a life - interest in it .
He shortly afterwards drew a chair close to her ' s , and , with a look which perfectly assured her of his good information , inquired after her sister .
And as it is -- only half blood !-- But you have such a generous spirit !"
" No ," said Anne , " that I can easily believe to be impossible ; but in time , perhaps -- we know what time does in every case of affliction , and you must remember , Captain Harville , that your friend may yet be called a young mourner -- only last summer , I understand ."
Once only , when she had been grieving over the last ill - judged , ill - fated walk to the Cobb , bitterly lamenting that it ever had been thought of , he burst forth , as if wholly overcome --
It is all very well , I used to say , for young people to be engaged , if there is a certainty of their being able to marry in six months , or even in twelve ; but a long engagement --"
" To see you ," cried he , " in the midst of those who could not be my well - wishers ; to see your cousin close by you , conversing and smiling , and feel all the horrible eligibilities and proprieties of the match !
no -- there is nothing to surprize one at all .-- A pretty fortune ; and she came in his way ."
Since he had neglected to do it on first coming to the estate , their quitting his house might be looked on as the most suitable period for its accomplishment .
This event , highly important to Mrs . Jennings ' s happiness , produced a temporary alteration in the disposal of her time , and influenced , in a like degree , the engagements of her young friends ; for as she wished to be as much as possible with Charlotte , she went thither every morning as soon as she was dressed , and did not return till late in the evening ; and the Miss Dashwoods , at the particular request of the Middletons , spent the whole of every day , in every day in Conduit Street .
Other opportunities of making her observations could not fail to occur .
The sisters set out at a pace , slow as the feebleness of Marianne in an exercise hitherto untried since her illness required ;-- and they had advanced only so far beyond the house as to admit a full view of the hill , the important hill behind , when pausing with her eyes turned towards it , Marianne calmly said ,
I remember it perfectly .
Quite the queen of the evening !-- Well , here we are at the passage .
" I should never think of standing on such ceremony with people I know so well as Mrs and the Miss Musgroves ."
" You , who have been the best friend I ever had in my life -- Want gratitude to you !-- Nobody is equal to you !-- I care for nobody as I do for you !-- Oh !
His evils seemed to lessen , her own advantages to increase , their mutual good to outweigh every drawback .
They must encounter each other , and make the best of it .
" No .
Look at the tree ."
Mrs . Smallridge is in a great hurry .
Emma shall be an angel , and I will keep my spleen to myself till Christmas brings John and Isabella .
Let me be able to fancy that a better knowledge of my heart , and of my present feelings , will draw from her a more spontaneous , more natural , more gentle , less dignified , forgiveness .
" Oh !
I assure you I shall not .
We must wait , it may be for many years .
Miss Steele was the least discomposed of the three , by their presence ; and it was in their power to reconcile her to it entirely .
Had he been in his right senses , he could not have thought of such a thing as begging you to give away half your fortune from your own child ."
Resentment could not have been more plainly spoken than in a civility to her father , from which she was so pointedly excluded .
The high - spirited , joyous - talking Louisa Musgrove , and the dejected , thinking , feeling , reading , Captain Benwick , seemed each of them everything that would not suit the other .
He drove through the park very fast , and they were soon out of sight ; and nothing more of them was seen till their return , which did not happen till after the return of all the rest .
She had hardly been able to speak a word , and every look and action had shewn how deeply she was suffering from consciousness .
And now , Miss Woodhouse , I do not think I shall mind seeing them again .
A discovery took place ,"-- here he hesitated and looked down .--" Mrs .
" Impossible !
" Have you never at any time had reason to think that he admired her , or that she admired him ?"
" I rather hope to satisfy you both ," said Emma , " for I shall do all in my power to make them happy , which will be enough for Isabella ; and happiness must preclude false indulgence and physic ."
yes , extremely well ; that is , I do not believe many people are acquainted with him , because Combe Magna is so far off ; but they all think him extremely agreeable I assure you .
Elizabeth ' s last letter had communicated a piece of news of some interest .
The Churchills might not have a word to say in return ; but then , you would have no habits of early obedience and long observance to break through .
Though her nephew had had no particular reason to hasten back on her account , she had not lived above six - and - thirty hours after his return .
A more reasonable cause might be found in the dependent situation which forbade the indulgence of his affection .
" Something so strange !
To have been described long ago to a recent acquaintance , by nameless people , is irresistible ; and Anne was all curiosity .
" What ?
" He did not stipulate for any particular sum , my dear Fanny ; he only requested me , in general terms , to assist them , and make their situation more comfortable than it was in his power to do .
He is a brave fellow .
" We have never finished Hamlet , Marianne ; our dear Willoughby went away before we could get through it .
Let every body on the Hill hear me if they can .
Yes , Friday or Saturday ; she cannot say which , because Colonel Campbell will be wanting the carriage himself one of those days .
The name makes me think of poor Isabella ; for she was very near being christened Catherine after her grandmama .
It must have been from attachment only , that she could be led to form the engagement .
I shall sit by you .
Whether former feelings were to be renewed must be brought to the proof ; former times must undoubtedly be brought to the recollection of each ; they could not but be reverted to ; the year of their engagement could not but be named by him , in the little narratives or descriptions which conversation called forth .
Had he married a more amiable woman , he might have been made still more respectable than he was :-- he might even have been made amiable himself ; for he was very young when he married , and very fond of his wife .
Oh !
Elton ."
All equality of alliance must rest with Elizabeth , for Mary had merely connected herself with an old country family of respectability and large fortune , and had therefore given all the honour and received none : Elizabeth would , one day or other , marry suitably .
Determined not to quit Marianne , though hopeless of contributing , at present , to her ease , she hurried away to excuse herself from attending Mrs . Jennings , on account of her sister being indisposed .
Full of thanks , and full of news , Miss Bates knew not which to give quickest .
Elinor thought this generosity overstrained , considering her sister ' s youth , and urged the matter farther , but in vain ; common sense , common care , common prudence , were all sunk in Mrs . Dashwood ' s romantic delicacy .
If we find they correspond , every fear of mine will be removed ."
The party , like other musical parties , comprehended a great many people who had real taste for the performance , and a great many more who had none at all ; and the performers themselves were , as usual , in their own estimation , and that of their immediate friends , the first private performers in England .
No , he could not believe it a bad house ; not such a house as a man was to be pitied for having .
And I see very few pearls in the room except mine .-- So Frank Churchill is a capital dancer , I understand .-- We shall see if our styles suit .-- A fine young man certainly is Frank Churchill .
And besides that , my cousin Richard said himself , that when it came to the point he was afraid Mr . Ferrars would be off ; and when Edward did not come near us for three days , I could not tell what to think myself ; and I believe in my heart Lucy gave it up all for lost ; for we came away from your brother ' s Wednesday , and we saw nothing of him not all Thursday , Friday , and Saturday , and did not know what was become of him .
There comes old Sir Archibald Drew and his grandson .
" Emma has been meaning to read more ever since she was twelve years old .
To spare Henrietta from agitation seemed the governing principle .
CHAPTER 8
They went to the sands , to watch the flowing of the tide , which a fine south - easterly breeze was bringing in with all the grandeur which so flat a shore admitted .
True affection only could have prompted it ."
They were now able to speak to each other and consult .
" In a few months , my dear Marianne ."
Every distinguishing attention that could be paid , was paid to her .
A very gracious invitation was returned , and the evening no longer dreaded by the fair mistress of the mansion .
Six years hence , if he could meet with a good sort of young woman in the same rank as his own , with a little money , it might be very desirable ."
Marianne was quite angry with her for doubting it .
" It was my father ' s last request to me ," replied her husband , " that I should assist his widow and daughters ."
In her earnest meditations on the contents of the letter , on the depravity of that mind which could dictate it , and probably , on the very different mind of a very different person , who had no other connection whatever with the affair than what her heart gave him with every thing that passed , Elinor forgot the immediate distress of her sister , forgot that she had three letters on her lap yet unread , and so entirely forgot how long she had been in the room , that when on hearing a carriage drive up to the door , she went to the window to see who could be coming so unreasonably early , she was all astonishment to perceive Mrs . Jennings ' s chariot , which she knew had not been ordered till one .
So altered -- so faded -- worn down by acute suffering of every kind !
Fanny was startled at the proposal .
` Can I do any thing for you at Kingston ?'
While he lived , it must be only an engagement ; but she flattered herself , that if divested of the danger of drawing her away , it might become an increase of comfort to him .-- How to do her best by Harriet , was of more difficult decision ;-- how to spare her from any unnecessary pain ; how to make her any possible atonement ; how to appear least her enemy ?-- On these subjects , her perplexity and distress were very great -- and her mind had to pass again and again through every bitter reproach and sorrowful regret that had ever surrounded it .-- She could only resolve at last , that she would still avoid a meeting with her , and communicate all that need be told by letter ; that it would be inexpressibly desirable to have her removed just now for a time from Highbury , and -- indulging in one scheme more -- nearly resolve , that it might be practicable to get an invitation for her to Brunswick Square .-- Isabella had been pleased with Harriet ; and a few weeks spent in London must give her some amusement .-- She did not think it in Harriet ' s nature to escape being benefited by novelty and variety , by the streets , the shops , and the children .-- At any rate , it would be a proof of attention and kindness in herself , from whom every thing was due ; a separation for the present ; an averting of the evil day , when they must all be together again .
And with this admirable discretion did she defer the assurance of her finding their mutual relatives more disagreeable than ever , and of her being particularly disgusted with his mother , till they were more in private .
William Larkins let me keep a larger quantity than usual this year .
" Because ," replied he , smiling , " among the rest of the objects before me , I see a very dirty lane ."
CHAPTER 44
However , this does make a difference ; and , perhaps , when we come to talk it over -- but these sort of things require a good deal of consideration .
As I am happily quite an altered creature in _one_ _respect_ , it is very fit that you should have the satisfaction of knowing it .
" Emma ," said Mr . Knightley presently , " I have a piece of news for you .
By ten o ' clock the whole party was assembled at the park , where they were to breakfast .
I do think he must have been sent for about money matters , for what else can it be ?
Elinor looked surprised at his emotion ; but trying to laugh off the subject , she said to him , " Do not you know my sister well enough to understand what she means ?
One or two meetings of this kind had taken place , without affording Elinor any chance of engaging Lucy in private , when Sir John called at the cottage one morning , to beg , in the name of charity , that they would all dine with Lady Middleton that day , as he was obliged to attend the club at Exeter , and she would otherwise be quite alone , except her mother and the two Miss Steeles .
Every body does not hunt ."
" Oh !
Why else should he have shewn such unwillingness to accept your invitation here ?"
Come on a donkey , however , if you prefer it .
brought him out of the straight line to stand near her , and make enquiries in return , in spite of the formidable father and sister in the back ground .
He gave her a momentary glance , a glance of brightness , which seemed to say , " That man is struck with you , and even I , at this moment , see something like Anne Elliot again ."
It was then about twelve o ' clock , and she returned to her sister ' s apartment to wait for the arrival of the apothecary , and to watch by her the rest of the night .
But she had seen enough of him to join in all the admiration of the others , and with an energy which always adorned her praise .
cried Emma , putting her hand before her face , and jumping up , " you make me more ashamed of myself than I can bear .
She had once partly promised Mrs Smith to spend the evening with her ; but in a short hurried call she excused herself and put it off , with the more decided promise of a longer visit on the morrow .
And Mrs .
Her form , though not so correct as her sister ' s , in having the advantage of height , was more striking ; and her face was so lovely , that when in the common cant of praise , she was called a beautiful girl , truth was less violently outraged than usually happens .
" Well -- but if any difficulties should arise , my housekeeper is extremely clever ."
" It is truly astonishing !"
was uttered by Captain Wentworth , Anne was sure could never be forgotten by her ; nor the sight of him afterwards , as he sat near a table , leaning over it with folded arms and face concealed , as if overpowered by the various feelings of his soul , and trying by prayer and reflection to calm them .
I should have made a good likeness of her , if she would have sat longer , but she was in such a hurry to have me draw her four children that she would not be quiet .
They had met .
" Yes ," said Anne , " you tell me nothing which does not accord with what I have known , or could imagine .
That , you know , was so very .
just the trifling , silly fellow I took him for ."
I declare , I have no patience with your sister ; and I hope , with all my heart , it will be a match in spite of her .
Mrs . Elton had most kindly sent Jane a note , or we should have been .-- But two such offers in one day !-- Never were such neighbours .
" That is ," replied Mr . Knightley , " she will indulge her even more than she did you , and believe that she does not indulge her at all .
Elinor , catching all , and more than all , his fears in a moment , proposed to call in further advice .
but indeed I would much rather have it only in one .
Upon my word we shall be absolutely dissipated .
" Not in the stage , I assure you ," replied Miss Steele , with quick exultation ; " we came post all the way , and had a very smart beau to attend us .
" Harriet , I will only venture to declare , that Mr . Knightley is the last man in the world , who would intentionally give any woman the idea of his feeling for her more than he really does ."
She plays charmingly ."
yes , that I do indeed .
" It was nearly three years after this unhappy period before I returned to England .
" Ah !"
" No ," said Mr . Knightley , nearly at the same time ; " you are not often deficient ; not often deficient either in manner or comprehension .
The Admiral wound it up summarily by exclaiming --
Mrs . Weston looked up , afraid to believe ; but Emma ' s countenance was as steady as her words .
And if he were to be lost to them for Harriet ' s sake ; if he were to be thought of hereafter , as finding in Harriet ' s society all that he wanted ; if Harriet were to be the chosen , the first , the dearest , the friend , the wife to whom he looked for all the best blessings of existence ; what could be increasing Emma ' s wretchedness but the reflection never far distant from her mind , that it had been all her own work ?
" Very true ," said Harriet .
Weston !-- Astonished that the person who had brought me up should be a gentlewoman !
He gave her a very plain , intelligible account of the whole ; a narration in which she saw a great deal of most characteristic proceeding .
" A very pleasant evening ," he began , as soon as Mr . Woodhouse had been talked into what was necessary , told that he understood , and the papers swept away ;--" particularly pleasant .
You must remember it now ?"
But the chair would never do .
Fanny Harville was a very superior creature , and his attachment to her was indeed attachment .
Wrapt up in a cloak of politeness , she seemed determined to hazard nothing .
But to what does all this lead ?
" Dreadful !-- Exactly so , indeed .-- She will be missed every moment ."
Chapter 11
You are in a melancholy humour , and fancy that any one unlike yourself must be happy .
No , he had been in Devonshire a fortnight .
Their fates , their fortunes , cannot be the same ; and had the natural sweet disposition of the one been guarded by a firmer mind , or a happier marriage , she might have been all that you will live to see the other be .
With the view of passing off an awkward moment , Emma smilingly said ,
Emma was quite relieved , and could presently say , with a little more composure ,
It is a melancholy consideration .
The word was discovered , and with a faint smile pushed away .
Shocked as Captain Harville was , he brought senses and nerves that could be instantly useful ; and a look between him and his wife decided what was to be done .
It was not to oblige Jane Fairfax therefore that he would have preferred the society of William Larkins .
Anne did not wish for more of such looks and speeches .
She now found that she had erred in relying on Elinor ' s representation of herself ; and justly concluded that every thing had been expressly softened at the time , to spare her from an increase of unhappiness , suffering as she then had suffered for Marianne .
there was no end of Miss Elliot ' s charms ."
I have been too much at my ease , too happy , too frank .
" Willoughby !"
He advised her against it , thought the jar too great ; but no , he reasoned and talked in vain , she smiled and said , " I am determined I will :" he put out his hands ; she was too precipitate by half a second , she fell on the pavement on the Lower Cobb , and was taken up lifeless !
Her affection for me deserved better treatment , and I often , with great self - reproach , recall the tenderness which , for a very short time , had the power of creating any return .
Your peace will not be shipwrecked as mine has been .
" Pardon me , dear cousin , you are unjust in your own claims .
I made the best excuses I could for not having been able to wait on him and Mrs . Elton on this happy occasion ; I said that I hoped I _should_ in the course of the summer .
What !
What shall we play at ?
With regard to Charles Hayter , she had delicacy which must be pained by any lightness of conduct in a well - meaning young woman , and a heart to sympathize in any of the sufferings it occasioned ; but if Henrietta found herself mistaken in the nature of her feelings , the alternation could not be understood too soon .
But , perhaps -- I may be equally in the way here .
It must be so .
I admire them much more if they are tall , straight , and flourishing .
It is so with some men .
" There is nothing to be compared to it .
The careless expression was life to Anne , who saw that Captain Wentworth was all attention , looking and listening with his whole soul ; and that the last words brought his enquiring eyes from Charles to herself .
There was much to regret .
The invitation was everywhere so well received , that it seemed as if , like Mrs . Elton , they were all taking the scheme as a particular compliment to themselves .-- Emma and Harriet professed very high expectations of pleasure from it ; and Mr . Weston , unasked , promised to get Frank over to join them , if possible ; a proof of approbation and gratitude which could have been dispensed with .-- Mr . Knightley was then obliged to say that he should be glad to see him ; and Mr . Weston engaged to lose no time in writing , and spare no arguments to induce him to come .
Lady Middleton too , though she did not press their mother , pressed them .
" I can never think of it without laughing .-- She hears us , she hears us , Miss Woodhouse .
" Remember , my love , that you are not seventeen .
" And Sir John too ," cried the elder sister , " what a charming man he is !"
I must buy something at Ford ' s .
" I think you will like him ," said Elinor , " when you know more of him ."
But I shall always think it a very abominable sort of proceeding .
I had heard you described by those who knew you intimately .
" Miss Elliot , I am sure you are tired ," cried Mrs Croft .
It was enough to secure his good opinion ; for to be unaffected was all that a pretty girl could want to make her mind as captivating as her person .
" Very true , Mr . Weston , perfectly true .
CHAPTER XVII
I wanted to know a little more , and this tells me quite enough .
She had the kindest " Good morning , God bless you !"
then recollecting herself , and not wishing to be answered , she added , " I certainly do think there has been by far too much trouble taken to procure the acquaintance .
Captain Wentworth turned in to call on his friend ; the others walked on , and he was to join them on the Cobb .
I know what thorough justice you will do it , and have scarcely a doubt of its happy effect .-- I think we shall never materially disagree about the writer again ; but I will not delay you by a long preface .-- We are quite well .-- This letter has been the cure of all the little nervousness I have been feeling lately .-- I did not quite like your looks on Tuesday , but it was an ungenial morning ; and though you will never own being affected by weather , I think every body feels a north - east wind .-- I felt for your dear father very much in the storm of Tuesday afternoon and yesterday morning , but had the comfort of hearing last night , by Mr . Perry , that it had not made him ill . " Yours ever , " A . W ."
Dear Miss Woodhouse , do advise me ."
I shall do THAT directly .
Time did not compose her .
" He wrote a letter to poor Mrs . Weston , to congratulate her , and a very proper , handsome letter it was .
They were , consequently , to stay the night there , and not to be expected back till the next day ' s dinner .
I am very angry with you ."
Perhaps you might notice the ring when you saw him ?"
I think you will agree with me , ( turning with a soft air to Emma ,) I think I shall certainly have your approbation , though Mr . Knightley perhaps , from being used to the large parties of London , may not quite enter into our feelings ."
Prettier musings of high - wrought love and eternal constancy , could never have passed along the streets of Bath , than Anne was sporting with from Camden Place to Westgate Buildings .
Did I imitate your forbearance , or lessen your restraints , by taking any part in those offices of general complaisance or particular gratitude which you had hitherto been left to discharge alone ?-- No ;-- not less when I knew you to be unhappy , than when I had believed you at ease , did I turn away from every exertion of duty or friendship ; scarcely allowing sorrow to exist but with me , regretting only THAT heart which had deserted and wronged me , and leaving you , for or I professed an unbounded affection , to be miserable for my sake ."
In such circumstances , it was better for both that they should not be long together ; and the restless state of Marianne ' s mind not only prevented her from remaining in the room a moment after she was dressed , but requiring at once solitude and continual change of place , made her wander about the house till breakfast time , avoiding the sight of every body .
" Oh yes !-- there is a great difference .
Her sorrow , her disappointment , her deep regret , when I told her that I was obliged to leave Devonshire so immediately -- I never shall forget it -- united too with such reliance , such confidence in me !-- Oh , God !-- what a hard - hearted rascal I was !"
" But every thing of that kind ," said Emma , " will soon be in so regular a train --"
He very much feared that Miss Fairfax derived more evil than good from them .
" No .
So began Miss Bates ; and Mr . Knightley seemed determined to be heard in his turn , for most resolutely and commandingly did he say ,
Can I do any thing for _you_ ?"
Her congratulations were warm and open ; but Emma could not speak so fluently .
" Putting all these very extraordinary circumstances together ," said Captain Wentworth , " we must consider it to be the arrangement of Providence , that you should not be introduced to your cousin ."
It was the very circumstance he could have wished for .
It suggested no other surprise than that Elinor and Marianne should sit so composedly by , without claiming a share in what was passing .
But Mrs . Smith must be obliged ;-- and her business will not detain you from us long I hope ."
She would not allow any other anxiety to succeed directly to the place in her mind which Harriet had occupied .
The visit of the Miss Steeles at Barton Park was lengthened far beyond what the first invitation implied .
Thomas ' s intelligence seemed over .
You do not know what it is to have tempers to manage ."
But are you really so attached to this place as to see no defect in it ?"
CHAPTER V
I have a little plan of alteration for your bedrooms too , which may now be performed without any inconvenience to any one .
" There is one subject ," he replied , " I hope but one , on which we do not think alike ."
" But she must not go round by London ," cried Marianne , in the same hurried manner .
She hardly knew yet what Mr . Knightley would ask ; but a very short parley with her own heart produced the most solemn resolution of never quitting her father .-- She even wept over the idea of it , as a sin of thought .
" That I will , with all my heart , and farther , too .
Marianne heard enough .
" I am afraid we must be running away ," said Emma , glancing at Harriet , and beginning to rise --" My father will be expecting us .
Comparisons would occur -- regrets would arise ;-- and her joy , though sincere as her love for her sister , was of a kind to give her neither spirits nor language .
I was miserable .
A small green court was the whole of its demesne in front ; and a neat wicket gate admitted them into it .
I do not like ruined , tattered cottages .
I had depended on her fortitude too far , and the blow was a severe one -- but had her marriage been happy , so young as I then was , a few months must have reconciled me to it , or at least I should not have now to lament it .
-- said he , letting it fall , and leaning against the mantel - piece as if forgetting he was to go .
Was it unpardonable to think it worth my while to come ?
Half a dozen natural children , perhaps -- and poor Frank cut off !-- This , though very undesirable , would be no matter of agony to her .
--
I shall be surprised at least if you ever received a hint of it , for I never did .
" Yes ," said he , looking not exactly forward ; " but there , I think , ends the resemblance .
I believe I did not play with the children quite so much as usual .
not I . I would as soon have been run up to the yard - arm .
Weston ?-- Judge between us .
Jane Fairfax ' s perception seemed to accompany his ; her comprehension was certainly more equal to the covert meaning , the superior intelligence , of those five letters so arranged .
" But I am afraid , Mr . Elton , Harriet will not like to sit .
You left nothing undone .
We have nothing clever to say -- not one of us .
He was the intimate friend of my dear husband , who trusted and loved him , and thought him as good as himself .
A reasonable visit paid , Mr . Weston began to move .--" He must be going .
Emma could not like what bordered on a reflection on Mr . Weston , and had half a mind to take it up ; but she struggled , and let it pass .
He argued like a young man very much bent on dancing ; and Emma was rather surprized to see the constitution of the Weston prevail so decidedly against the habits of the Churchills .
" No , not true on your side .
He had nestled down his head most conveniently .
She would have liked to know how he felt as to a meeting .
I can easily believe that letters are very little to you , much less than to me , but it is not your being ten years older than myself which makes the difference , it is not age , but situation .
They had in fact nothing to wish for , but the marriage of Colonel Brandon and Marianne , and rather better pasturage for their cows .
So acutely did Mrs . Dashwood feel this ungracious behaviour , and so earnestly did she despise her daughter - in - law for it , that , on the arrival of the latter , she would have quitted the house for ever , had not the entreaty of her eldest girl induced her first to reflect on the propriety of going , and her own tender love for all her three children determined her afterwards to stay , and for their sakes avoid a breach with their brother .
Marianne slowly continued --
Harriet behaved extremely well on the occasion , with great self - command .
She has been taught nothing useful , and is too young and too simple to have acquired any thing herself .
Now , as we may fairly suppose , he would not allow much time to pass before he spoke to the lady , and as he does not appear to have spoken yesterday , it is not unlikely that he should be at Mrs . Goddard ' s to - day ; and she may be detained by a visitor , without thinking him at all a tiresome wretch ."
Did not you observe her manner of answering me ?
Not that she _wanted_ him to marry .
" But you , who are so extremely fond of it -- there can be no danger , surely ?"
His manner had no air of study or exaggeration .
" Then I rather suspect that my interest would do very little ."
" Come ," said he , " you are anxious for a compliment , so I will tell you that you have improved her .
Next week ?
But can we wonder that , with such a husband to provoke inconstancy , and without a friend to advise or restrain her ( for my father lived only a few months after their marriage , and I was with my regiment in the East Indies ) she should fall ?
Mr . Edward Ferrars , the very young man I used to joke with you about ( but however , as it turns out , I am monstrous glad there was never any thing in it ), Mr . Edward Ferrars , it seems , has been engaged above this twelvemonth to my cousin Lucy !-- There ' s for you , my dear !-- And not a creature knowing a syllable of the matter , except Nancy !-- Could you have believed such a thing possible ?-- There is no great wonder in their liking one another ; but that matters should be brought so forward between them , and nobody suspect it !-- THAT is strange !-- I never happened to see them together , or I am sure I should have found it out directly .
But here , Elinor could neither wonder nor blame ; and when she saw , as she assisted Marianne from the carriage , that she had been crying , she saw only an emotion too natural in itself to raise any thing less tender than pity , and in its unobtrusiveness entitled to praise .
If Emma had still , at intervals , an anxious feeling for Harriet , a momentary doubt of its being possible for her to be really cured of her attachment to Mr . Knightley , and really able to accept another man from unbiased inclination , it was not long that she had to suffer from the recurrence of any such uncertainty .
He was not at all ashamed of the acquaintance , and did , in fact , think and talk a great deal more about the Admiral , than the Admiral ever thought or talked about him .
That the hair was her own , she instantaneously felt as well satisfied as Marianne ; the only difference in their conclusions was , that what Marianne considered as a free gift from her sister , Elinor was conscious must have been procured by some theft or contrivance unknown to herself .
I am a great dreamer .
We must not allow them to be verified in sweet Jane Fairfax ."
" As to that ," said he , " I must rub through the world as well as I can .
They attempted , therefore , likewise , to excuse themselves ; the weather was uncertain , and not likely to be good .
Then do tell me what he was at that time of life .
But then , is not it the same with many other professions , perhaps most other ?
As a magistrate , he had generally some point of law to consult John about , or , at least , some curious anecdote to give ; and as a farmer , as keeping in hand the home - farm at Donwell , he had to tell what every field was to bear next year , and to give all such local information as could not fail of being interesting to a brother whose home it had equally been the longest part of his life , and whose attachments were strong .
That Frank Churchill thought less of her than he had done , was indubitable .
Such was her parting concern ; for after this , she had time only to pay her farewell compliments to Mrs . Jennings , before her company was claimed by Mrs . Richardson ; and Elinor was left in possession of knowledge which might feed her powers of reflection some time , though she had learnt very little more than what had been already foreseen and foreplanned in her own mind .
That sentence is very prettily turned .
Their resemblance in good principles and good sense , in disposition and manner of thinking , would probably have been sufficient to unite them in friendship , without any other attraction ; but their being in love with two sisters , and two sisters fond of each other , made that mutual regard inevitable and immediate , which might otherwise have waited the effect of time and judgment .
" Yes , Mr . Dixon and Miss Campbell were the persons ; and I thought it a very strong proof ."
" Sometimes ."
" However it may have come about ," said Elinor , after a pause ,--" they are certainly married .
And Mrs . Jennings too , an exceedingly well - behaved woman , though not so elegant as her daughter .
However , at any rate , as I have a great deal more at stake on this point than anybody else can have , I think it rather unnecessary in you to be advising me ."
She was so wretched and so vehement , complained so much of injustice in being expected to go away instead of Anne ; Anne , who was nothing to Louisa , while she was her sister , and had the best right to stay in Henrietta ' s stead !
Louisa was much the same .
I hope you find a chair .
Colonel Brandon came in while the party were at tea , and by his manner of looking round the room for Marianne , Elinor immediately fancied that he neither expected nor wished to see her there , and , in short , that he was already aware of what occasioned her absence .
It is with great regret that I obey your commands in returning the letters with which I have been honoured from you , and the lock of hair , which you so obligingly bestowed on me .
" I had no notion that he liked me so very much ," said Harriet , contemplating the letter .
I had not the least idea !-- Jane took Mrs . Elton aside , and told her at once , that upon thinking over the advantages of Mrs . Smallridge ' s situation , she had come to the resolution of accepting it .-- I did not know a word of it till it was all settled ."
Mrs Clay was right .
cried the good - hearted Mrs . John Knightley .
" Does nothing occur to you ?-- Do not you recollect ?-- Harriet Smith ."
It is very plain that he considers the good fortune of the engagement as all on my side , but that he is not without hope of my growing , in time , as worthy of your affection , as you think me already .
It deranged his best plan of domestic happiness , his best hope of keeping Sir Walter single by the watchfulness which a son - in - law ' s rights would have given .
He came to the Abbey two evenings ago , on purpose to consult me about it .
He has told me so himself ."
Do not imagine me in danger of forgetting it ."
Emma could not forgive her ;-- but as neither provocation nor resentment were discerned by Mr . Knightley , who had been of the party , and had seen only proper attention and pleasing behaviour on each side , he was expressing the next morning , being at Hartfield again on business with Mr . Woodhouse , his approbation of the whole ; not so openly as he might have done had her father been out of the room , but speaking plain enough to be very intelligible to Emma .
But from such vain wishes she was forced to turn for comfort to the renewal of her confidence in Edward ' s affection , to the remembrance of every mark of regard in look or word which fell from him while at Barton , and above all to that flattering proof of it which he constantly wore round his finger .
" To be sure I am .
And Elizabeth , too .
" Your sincere well - wisher , friend , and sister , " LUCY FERRARS .
" He WOULD have told me so , I doubt not , had I made any such inquiries , but they happened to be points on which I had been previously informed ."
After a mutual silence of some minutes , Harriet thus began again --
" Mr . Weston will be almost as much relieved as myself ," said she .
He never even believed himself to see her equal .
How well she looked last night !"
" I am sorry for that .
He had only himself to please in his choice : his fortune was his own ; for as to Frank , it was more than being tacitly brought up as his uncle ' s heir , it had become so avowed an adoption as to have him assume the name of Churchill on coming of age .
It was quite unkind of you not to come on Thursday ."
I was once very near -- and I wish I had -- it would have been better .
Such things in general cannot be too short ."
Did not I tell you what he said of you the other day ?"
I am sure you always thought me unfit for the office I held ."
Who is it ?
The resemblance between her and her mother was strikingly great .
He did not believe there was a bolder rider in England !
She means it , I know ."
I have this moment heard that the Crofts are going to Bath almost immediately ; they think the Admiral gouty .
[ At this point in the first and second editions , Volume 1 ends .]
--
For some time she was amused , without thinking beyond the immediate cause ; but as she came to understand the family better , other feelings arose .
Anne , really tired herself , was glad to sit down ; and she very soon heard Captain Wentworth and Louisa in the hedge - row , behind her , as if making their way back along the rough , wild sort of channel , down the centre .
And the distinction is not quite so much against the candour and common sense of the world as appears at first ; for a very narrow income has a tendency to contract the mind , and sour the temper .
It was but an effusion of lively spirits .
" If I thought it would not tempt her to go out in sharp winds , and grow coarse , I would send her a new hat and pelisse ."
But still I cannot imagine she would not be persuaded ."
said Mr . Weston , looking about .
You cannot think how happy I shall be !
Accordingly , with a mixture of the serious and the playful , which she hoped would best suit his half and half state , she replied ,
They will have ten thousand pounds divided amongst them .
" He is very plain , undoubtedly -- remarkably plain :-- but that is nothing compared with his entire want of gentility .
I offered immediately , as soon as my mother related the affair to me , to talk to him myself , and dissuade him from the match ; but it was too late THEN , I found , to do any thing , for unluckily , I was not in the way at first , and knew nothing of it till after the breach had taken place , when it was not for me , you know , to interfere .
" Oh , Elinor !"
Their subjects in general were such as belong to an opening acquaintance .
He reads the Agricultural Reports , and some other books that lay in one of the window seats -- but he reads all _them_ to himself .
And ever since she was twelve , Emma has been mistress of the house and of you all .
CHAPTER 38
He had remained in Shropshire , lamenting the blindness of his own pride , and the blunders of his own calculations , till at once released from Louisa by the astonishing and felicitous intelligence of her engagement with Benwick .
We shall know more about them all , in half an hour , from you , than Miss Fairfax would have vouchsafed in half a year ."
His present attentions to your family are very sincere : quite from the heart .
Nobody thought of Hannah till you mentioned her -- James is so obliged to you !"
At the same time , however , it was a secret gratification to herself to have seen her cousin , and to know that the future owner of Kellynch was undoubtedly a gentleman , and had an air of good sense .
evil to some is always good to others .
Mrs . Weston was sorry for such a charge .
" Pretty well , my dear -- I hope -- pretty well .-- I do not know but that the place agrees with her tolerably ."
The difference between his present air and what it had been in the Octagon Room was strikingly great .
" Mr . Wingfield most strenuously recommended it , sir -- or we should not have gone .
With all the state which a butler and foot - boy could give , Mr Elliot was ushered into the room .
Ah !
The disappointment of the evening before seemed forgotten in the expectation of what was to happen that day .
How could it be ?
She always travels with her own sheets ; an excellent precaution .
I have often heard him declare , that if baronetcies were saleable , anybody should have his for fifty pounds , arms and motto , name and livery included ; but I will not pretend to repeat half that I used to hear him say on that subject .
" These are difficulties which you must settle for yourself .
" Oh !
She could soon sit upright on the sofa , and began to hope she might be able to leave it by dinner - time .
They had begun to fail him before he entered the house , and they were quite overcome by the captivating manners of Mrs . Dashwood .
" She meant to be impertinently curious , just as such an Anne Cox should be ."
Your mother will secure to you , in time , that independence you are so anxious for ; it is her duty , and it will , it must ere long become her happiness to prevent your whole youth from being wasted in discontent .
Colonel Campbell rather preferred an olive .
Where Miss Taylor failed to stimulate , I may safely affirm that Harriet Smith will do nothing .-- You never could persuade her to read half so much as you wished .-- You know you could not ."
It seems an impossibility !-- You cannot mean to say , that Harriet Smith has accepted Robert Martin .
And dear Emma , too !-- What a dreadful loss to you both !-- I have been so grieved for you .-- I could not imagine how you could possibly do without her .-- It is a sad change indeed .-- But I hope she is pretty well , sir ."
He had not forgiven Anne Elliot .
If in that light there is anything which you suppose his cousin might fairly ask of him , I beg you would not hesitate to employ me ."
I know nothing of the picturesque ."
that I had never seen her !"
The horror of the moment to all who stood around !
That good lady , however , saw only that Marianne had received a letter from Willoughby , which appeared to her a very good joke , and which she treated accordingly , by hoping , with a laugh , that she would find it to her liking .
" Well , Marianne ," said Elinor , as soon as he had left them , " for ONE morning I think you have done pretty well .
" He likes you .
The dream must be borne with , and Mr . Knightley must take his seat with the rest round the large modern circular table which Emma had introduced at Hartfield , and which none but Emma could have had power to place there and persuade her father to use , instead of the small - sized Pembroke , on which two of his daily meals had , for forty years been crowded .
He has not been able to get the Romance of the Forest yet .
She meant to avoid any such alteration of manners as might provoke a remonstrance on his side .
Think she must of the possible difference to the poor little boy ; and yet she only gave herself a saucy conscious smile about it , and found amusement in detecting the real cause of that violent dislike of Mr . Knightley ' s marrying Jane Fairfax , or any body else , which at the time she had wholly imputed to the amiable solicitude of the sister and the aunt .
In short , she sat , during the first visit , looking at Jane Fairfax with twofold complacency ; the sense of pleasure and the sense of rendering justice , and was determining that she would dislike her no longer .
" And I , Mr . Knightley , am equally stout in my confidence of its not doing them any harm .
Emma ' s courage returned , and she walked on .
Willoughby filled every page .
" I must have asked Miss Fairfax , and her languid dancing would not have agreed with me , after your ' s ."
" But , Mr . Knightley , she is really very sorry to lose poor Miss Taylor , and I am sure she _will_ miss her more than she thinks for ."
And it is no small credit , in my opinion , to him , that he should excite such an affection ; for , though I would not say it to any body else , she has no more heart than a stone to people in general ; and the devil of a temper ."
She occupied her mind as much as possible in such like musings and quotations ; but it was not possible , that when within reach of Captain Wentworth ' s conversation with either of the Miss Musgroves , she should not try to hear it ; yet she caught little very remarkable .
He had seen you indeed , before he came to Bath , and admired you , but without knowing it to be you .
It must , if I were not here .
" Colonel Brandon , I think , lodges in St . James Street ," said he , soon afterwards , rising from his chair .
How have I delighted , as I walked , to see them driven in showers about me by the wind !
In mourning , you see , just as our Mr Elliot must be .
I assure you I have no doubt of its doing Mr . Woodhouse good ."
Hartfield will only put her out of conceit with all the other places she belongs to .
The same warmth of heart , the same eagerness of fancy and spirits .
" I doubt its being very clever myself ," said Mr . Weston .
" Trouble !
Her usefulness to little Charles would always give some sweetness to the memory of her two months ' visit there , but he was gaining strength apace , and she had nothing else to stay for .
You will not like the noise ."
" No , indeed I do not ."
In about five minutes he returned .
" No ,"-- he calmly replied ,--" there is but one married woman in the world whom I can ever allow to invite what guests she pleases to Donwell , and that one is --"
Emma must submit to stand second to Mrs . Elton , though she had always considered the ball as peculiarly for her .
Mrs . Weston ' s communications furnished Emma with more food for unpleasant reflection , by increasing her esteem and compassion , and her sense of past injustice towards Miss Fairfax .
Another view of man , my second brings , Behold him there , the monarch of the seas !
" Do not blame him , however , for departing from his character , where the deviation is necessary .
A very desirable connection on both sides , and I have not a doubt of its taking place in time .
" I am afraid ," returned Emma , sighing , " that I must often have contributed to make her unhappy ."
It was possible that you might retain the feelings of the past , as I did ; and one encouragement happened to be mine .
I am not fond of nettles or thistles , or heath blossoms .
Never had any week passed so quickly -- he could hardly believe it to be gone .
A mutual silence took place for some time .
was Sir Walter ' s cold suspicious inquiry .
" You are very obliging ; but as to all that , I am very indifferent ; it would be no object to me to be with the rich ; my mortifications , I think , would only be the greater ; I should suffer more from comparison .
One cannot love a reserved person ."
and I can account for it only in one way ; you are not yourself , or you could not speak either to me , or of Harriet , in such a manner .
Look , he sees us ; he kisses his hand to you ; he takes you for my wife .
I shall certainly go ; I am sure I ought if I can , quite as much as Charles , for they want me excessively to be acquainted with Captain Wentworth , and I know you do not mind being left alone .
" Indeed !
I require so much !
They had each had money , but their marriages had made a material difference in their degree of consequence .
" Yes , ma ' am , she said how she was very well ; and to my mind she was always a very handsome young lady -- and she seemed vastly contented ."
They were all at her disposal .
I know what you mean -- but Emma ' s hand is the strongest ."
They added to their house , to their number of servants , to their expenses of every sort ; and by this time were , in fortune and style of living , second only to the family at Hartfield .
Absence might have weakened his regard , and convenience might have determined him to overcome it , but that such a regard had formerly existed she could not bring herself to doubt .
If not wise or refined herself , she would have connected him with those who were ; but Miss Hawkins , it might be fairly supposed from her easy conceit , had been the best of her own set .
Mr . Knightley to be no longer coming there for his evening comfort !-- No longer walking in at all hours , as if ever willing to change his own home for their ' s !-- How was it to be endured ?
She sat in silence almost all the way , wrapt in her own meditations , and scarcely ever voluntarily speaking , except when any object of picturesque beauty within their view drew from her an exclamation of delight exclusively addressed to her sister .
They did as they were desired ; and by the time she judged it reasonable to have done with her boot , she had the comfort of farther delay in her power , being overtaken by a child from the cottage , setting out , according to orders , with her pitcher , to fetch broth from Hartfield .
I saw that my own feelings had prepared my sufferings , and that my want of fortitude under them had almost led me to the grave .
exclaimed Mary , tauntingly .
Mr . Knightley , a sensible man about seven or eight - and - thirty , was not only a very old and intimate friend of the family , but particularly connected with it , as the elder brother of Isabella ' s husband .
yes ,-- I am quite convinced that , with very few exceptions , the sea - air always does good .
Sophy must write , and beg him to come to Bath .
" She really left nothing for Mary to do .
I do not scruple to say that she plays extremely well .
On the contrary , if I have felt any anxiety at all on the subject , it has been in recollecting that he sometimes showed a want of pleasure and readiness in accepting my invitation , when I talked of his coming to Barton .
The lane made a slight bend ; and when that bend was passed , Mr . Elton was immediately in sight ; and so near as to give Emma time only to say farther ,
She thought he was often looking at her , and trying for a fuller view of her face than it suited her to give .
All his caution was spent in being secured of the real amount of her fortune , before he committed himself .
While she talked of his son , Mr . Weston ' s attention was chained ; but when she got to Maple Grove , he could recollect that there were ladies just arriving to be attended to , and with happy smiles must hurry away .
It was a pleasant fertile spot , well wooded , and rich in pasture .
It was a lucky recollection , all her good spirits were restored by it .
" I had .
Marianne looked with amazement at Edward , with compassion at her sister .
If in the supposition of his seeking to marry herself , his difficulties from his mother had seemed great , how much greater were they now likely to be , when the object of his engagement was undoubtedly inferior in connections , and probably inferior in fortune to herself .
" Undoubtedly .
" Go to him , go to him ," cried Anne , " for heaven ' s sake go to him .
Every thing he said , was clever .
Yet so miserably had he conducted himself , that though she was at this present time ( the summer of 1814 ) wearing black ribbons for his wife , she could not admit him to be worth thinking of again .
Now , however , we must wish you and Mrs . Bates good morning ."
Excepting one short period of her life , she had never , since the age of fourteen , never since the loss of her dear mother , known the happiness of being listened to , or encouraged by any just appreciation or real taste .
Lady Middleton was not more than six or seven and twenty ; her face was handsome , her figure tall and striking , and her address graceful .
" I am sorry to find you unwell ," replied Anne .
She had , however , one very intimate friend , a sensible , deserving woman , who had been brought , by strong attachment to herself , to settle close by her , in the village of Kellynch ; and on her kindness and advice , Lady Elliot mainly relied for the best help and maintenance of the good principles and instruction which she had been anxiously giving her daughters .
In comparison of Norland , it was poor and small indeed !-- but the tears which recollection called forth as they entered the house were soon dried away .
There was a numerous family ; but the only two grown up , excepting Charles , were Henrietta and Louisa , young ladies of nineteen and twenty , who had brought from school at Exeter all the usual stock of accomplishments , and were now like thousands of other young ladies , living to be fashionable , happy , and merry .
" Poor young man !-- and what is to become of him ?"
Things did not seem -- that is , there seemed a little cloud upon the spirits of some .-- So it appeared to me at least , but I might be mistaken .
Nay , more , I consider it as the only form of building in which happiness is attainable , and were I rich enough I would instantly pull Combe down , and build it up again in the exact plan of this cottage ."
" But you would not wish me to come away before I am tired , papa ?"
If we CAN but put Willoughby out of her head !"
In every other respect , in looking around her , or penetrating forward , she saw more to distrust and to apprehend .
" Worse than I had supposed .
But thirty - five has nothing to do with matrimony ."
" If you mean Miss Fairfax and Frank Churchill , I have heard that already ."
Mr Elliot appeared to think that he ( Sir Walter ) was looking exactly as he had done when they last parted ;" but Sir Walter had " not been able to return the compliment entirely , which had embarrassed him .
Edward has drawn his own lot , and I fear it will be a bad one ."
The past , the present , the future , Willoughby ' s visit , Marianne ' s safety , and her mother ' s expected arrival , threw her altogether into an agitation of spirits which kept off every indication of fatigue , and made her only fearful of betraying herself to her sister .
The intelligence however , which SHE would not give , soon flowed from another quarter .
So much superadded decision of character !
I would not say so to every body , Mrs . Elton , but I have not much faith in Mrs . Churchill ' s illness ."
" Well , whenever it suits you .
could the originals of the portraits against the wainscot , could the gentlemen in brown velvet and the ladies in blue satin have seen what was going on , have been conscious of such an overthrow of all order and neatness !
She thought there was an air of greater happiness than usual -- a glow both of complexion and spirits .
It did her no service however .
" Had you any idea ," cried Harriet , " of his being in love with her ?-- You , perhaps , might .-- You ( blushing as she spoke ) who can see into every body ' s heart ; but nobody else --"
Little Henry was in her thoughts , and a mixture of alarm and delicacy made her irresolute what else to say .
The yeomanry are precisely the order of people with whom I feel I can have nothing to do .
" And so YOU are forced to do it .
I was to decide on the best of them .
" My dear , you do not understand me .
Emma wished he would be less pointed , yet could not help being amused ; and when on glancing her eye towards Jane Fairfax she caught the remains of a smile , when she saw that with all the deep blush of consciousness , there had been a smile of secret delight , she had less scruple in the amusement , and much less compunction with respect to her .-- This amiable , upright , perfect Jane Fairfax was apparently cherishing very reprehensible feelings .
Mr . Palmer maintained the common , but unfatherly opinion among his sex , of all infants being alike ; and though she could plainly perceive , at different times , the most striking resemblance between this baby and every one of his relations on both sides , there was no convincing his father of it ; no persuading him to believe that it was not exactly like every other baby of the same age ; nor could he even be brought to acknowledge the simple proposition of its being the finest child in the world .
" Will he , indeed ?
Marianne , few as had been her hours of comfort in London , and eager as she had long been to quit it , could not , when it came to the point , bid adieu to the house in which she had for the last time enjoyed those hopes , and that confidence , in Willoughby , which were now extinguished for ever , without great pain .
Your ideas are only more noble than mine .
He was not Mr Wentworth , the former curate of Monkford , however suspicious appearances may be , but a Captain Frederick Wentworth , his brother , who being made commander in consequence of the action off St Domingo , and not immediately employed , had come into Somersetshire , in the summer of 1806 ; and having no parent living , found a home for half a year at Monkford .
" To a Mrs . Smallridge -- charming woman -- most superior -- to have the charge of her three little girls -- delightful children .
You , Miss Woodhouse , I well know , play delightfully .
as for me , my judgment is worth nothing .
" Well , my dear , and did you get there safely ?-- And how did you find my worthy old friend and her daughter ?-- I dare say they must have been very much obliged to you for coming .
They recommended the army .
She made her plan ; she would speak of something totally different -- the children in Brunswick Square ; and she only waited for breath to begin , when Mr . Knightley startled her , by saying ,
Well , ( smiling ,) I hope it may be allowed that if compassion has produced exertion and relief to the sufferers , it has done all that is truly important .
Mary , very much gratified by this attention , was delighted to receive him , while a thousand feelings rushed on Anne , of which this was the most consoling , that it would soon be over .
" Who told you that Mr . Ferrars was married , Thomas ?"
But if you want to shew him any attention , my dear , ask him to come and dine with us some day .
Elinor made her a civil reply , and they walked on for a few minutes in silence .
Indeed , brother , your anxiety for our welfare and prosperity carries you too far ."
said John Knightley .
He was ordered to walk to keep off the gout , and Mrs Croft seemed to go shares with him in everything , and to walk for her life to do him good .
" How I could so long a time be fancying myself !
In this state of her spirits , a letter was delivered to her from the post , which contained a proposal particularly well timed .
I saw her placed in comfortable lodgings , and under proper attendants ; I visited her every day during the rest of her short life : I was with her in her last moments ."
I trust , at least , that you do not think Mr . Knightley looking ill ," turning her eyes with affectionate anxiety towards her husband .
It is a great way , you know , from hence to Barton ."
This was almost cruel .
" A letter of proper submission !"
" Middling , my dear ; I cannot compliment you .
" It is very true .
Lucy was all exultation on being so honorably distinguished ; and Miss Steele wanted only to be teazed about Dr . Davies to be perfectly happy .
I have seen a great many lists of her drawing - up at various times of books that she meant to read regularly through -- and very good lists they were -- very well chosen , and very neatly arranged -- sometimes alphabetically , and sometimes by some other rule .
The strength of the song falls on the second ."
Only look , sister , how delightful every thing is !
said Emma , as she turned back into the hall again .
and I am sure our thanks are due to you , Mrs . Weston , on that score .
The excellence of his understanding and his principles can be concealed only by that shyness which too often keeps him silent .
She would have given a great deal , or endured a great deal , to have had the Martins in a higher rank of life .
Her own father ' s perfect exemption from any thought of the kind , the entire deficiency in him of all such sort of penetration or suspicion , was a most comfortable circumstance .
It was painful to him even to keep a third cousin to himself .
Such a name !"
Frank Churchill came back again ; and if he kept his father ' s dinner waiting , it was not known at Hartfield ; for Mrs . Weston was too anxious for his being a favourite with Mr . Woodhouse , to betray any imperfection which could be concealed .
Recollecting , soon afterwards , that he was probably dividing Elinor from her sister , he put an end to his visit , receiving from her again the same grateful acknowledgments , and leaving her full of compassion and esteem for him .
They might in fact , have borne down a great deal more than they met with , for there was little to distress them beyond the want of graciousness and warmth .
Yes , I am sure you are much too reasonable .
Charles shewed himself at the window , all was ready , their visitor had bowed and was gone , the Miss Musgroves were gone too , suddenly resolving to walk to the end of the village with the sportsmen : the room was cleared , and Anne might finish her breakfast as she could .
" Oh , Edward !
I wish young ladies had not such a number of fine Christian names .
While Admiral Croft was taking this walk with Anne , and expressing his wish of getting Captain Wentworth to Bath , Captain Wentworth was already on his way thither .
" You know I always cure you when I come .
of South Park , in the county of Gloucester , by which lady ( who died 1800 ) he has issue Elizabeth , born June 1 , 1785 ; Anne , born August 9 , 1787 ; a still - born son , November 5 , 1789 ; Mary , born November 20 , 1791 ."
Perhaps Mrs . Jennings was in hopes , by this vigorous sketch of their future ennui , to provoke him to make that offer , which might give himself an escape from it ;-- and if so , she had soon afterwards good reason to think her object gained ; for , on Elinor ' s moving to the window to take more expeditiously the dimensions of a print , which she was going to copy for her friend , he followed her to it with a look of particular meaning , and conversed with her there for several minutes .
How very comfortable they make it ;-- impossible to feel cold with such precautions .
The consequence of which was , that Mrs . John Dashwood was obliged to submit not only to the exceedingly great inconvenience of sending her carriage for the Miss Dashwoods , but , what was still worse , must be subject to all the unpleasantness of appearing to treat them with attention : and who could tell that they might not expect to go out with her a second time ?
Who would submit to the indignity of being approved by such a woman as Lady Middleton and Mrs . Jennings , that could command the indifference of any body else ?"
All the little variations of the last week were gone through ; and of yesterday and today there could scarcely be an end .
but he hoped he should in time ."
" Perhaps , then ," he hesitatingly replied , " what I heard this morning may be -- there may be more truth in it than I could believe possible at first ."
You need not say anything more of your ignorance .
" No , Marianne , in no possible way ."
She put it into her hands as she spoke ; and when Elinor saw the painting , whatever other doubts her fear of a too hasty decision , or her wish of detecting falsehood might suffer to linger in her mind , she could have none of its being Edward ' s face .
" No , indeed you are mistaken ."
Her daughter did not look , however , as if much of it were heard by her .
It is my daily errand .
They had travelled half their way along the rough lane , before she was quite awake to what they said .
The younger boy , a remarkable stout , forward child , of two years old , having got the door opened for him by some one without , made his determined appearance among them , and went straight to the sofa to see what was going on , and put in his claim to anything good that might be giving away .
He had spoken to her with some degree of openness of Mrs Clay ; had appeared completely to see what Mrs Clay was about , and to hold her in contempt ; and yet Mrs Clay found him as agreeable as any body .
He asked me to a party , a dance at his house in the evening .-- Had he NOT told me as an inducement that you and your sister were to be there , I should have felt it too certain a thing , to trust myself near him .
She paused over it for some time with indignant astonishment ; then read it again and again ; but every perusal only served to increase her abhorrence of the man , and so bitter were her feelings against him , that she dared not trust herself to speak , lest she might wound Marianne still deeper by treating their disengagement , not as a loss to her of any possible good but as an escape from the worst and most irremediable of all evils , a connection , for life , with an unprincipled man , as a deliverance the most real , a blessing the most important .
Does Elinor expect him already ?"
" Yes I should , I am sure I should .
the peace has come too soon for that younker .
He hunted and shot , and she humoured her children ; and these were their only resources .
A glass of wine , which Elinor procured for her directly , made her more comfortable , and she was at last able to express some sense of her kindness , by saying ,
Do not forget your engagement ."
I shall see how much I am before - hand with the world in the spring , and we will plan our improvements accordingly ."
" It is a beautiful country ," he replied ; " but these bottoms must be dirty in winter ."
You remember him , I am sure ."
" Very true , Miss Woodhouse , so she will .
He had been detained by a temporary increase of illness in her ; a nervous seizure , which had lasted some hours -- and he had quite given up every thought of coming , till very late ;-- and had he known how hot a ride he should have , and how late , with all his hurry , he must be , he believed he should not have come at all .
" Why should you think so !"
In that respect Mrs . Weston ' s loss had been important .
They have no difficulties to contend with at home , no opposition , no caprice , no delays .
It included nearly a third part of her own life .
They were soon within thirty yards of the gentleman .
There was no resisting such news , no possibility of avoiding the influence of such a happy face as Mr . Weston ' s , confirmed as it all was by the words and the countenance of his wife , fewer and quieter , but not less to the purpose .
In the evening , when they were all three together , Marianne began voluntarily to speak of him again ;-- but that it was not without an effort , the restless , unquiet thoughtfulness in which she had been for some time previously sitting -- her rising colour , as she spoke ,-- and her unsteady voice , plainly shewed .
Her arm was pressed again , as he added , in a more broken and subdued accent , " The feelings of the warmest friendship -- Indignation -- Abominable scoundrel !"
Sir Walter would quit Kellynch Hall ; and after a very few days more of doubt and indecision , the great question of whither he should go was settled , and the first outline of this important change made out .
" Perhaps Miss Fairfax has never been staying here so long before ."
-- She thought he neither looked nor spoke cheerfully ; and the first possible cause for it , suggested by her fears , was , that he had perhaps been communicating his plans to his brother , and was pained by the manner in which they had been received .
It was very early in September ; the season was fine , and from first seeing the place under the advantage of good weather , they received an impression in its favour which was of material service in recommending it to their lasting approbation .
" In short ," said he , " perhaps , Miss Woodhouse -- I think you can hardly be quite without suspicion "--
I am afraid you must have had a shocking walk ."
As long as Mr . Knightley remained with them , Emma ' s fever continued ; but when he was gone , she began to be a little tranquillised and subdued -- and in the course of the sleepless night , which was the tax for such an evening , she found one or two such very serious points to consider , as made her feel , that even her happiness must have some alloy .
If she were to meet Miss Bates in her way !-- and upon its beginning to rain , Emma was obliged to expect that the weather would be detaining her at Mrs . Goddard ' s , and that the intelligence would undoubtedly rush upon her without preparation .
Now she hoped for some beneficial change ; and , after a period of nothing - saying amongst the party , some of them did decide on going in quest of tea .
I shall , therefore , set off to - morrow .'
They do everything to confer happiness , I am sure .
" And after all , five couple are not enough to make it worth while to stand up .
" Marianne can never keep long from that instrument you know , ma ' am ," said Elinor , endeavouring to smooth away the offence ; " and I do not much wonder at it ; for it is the very best toned piano - forte I ever heard ."
But I am sorry to relate what ensued .
And Emma had the advantage of hearing her own silly compliment repeated twice over before the good old lady could comprehend it .
He had been most warmly attached to her , and had never seen a woman since whom he thought her equal ; but , except from some natural sensation of curiosity , he had no desire of meeting her again .
" I must see Captain Benwick before I decide ," said Lady Russell , smiling .
She was all pleasure and gratitude , both for Harriet and herself , and longed to be thanking him ; and though too distant for speech , her countenance said much , as soon as she could catch his eye again .
Journeys , London , servants , horses , table -- contractions and restrictions every where !
Dear Mrs . Weston !
He is brother to Mrs . John Dashwood -- THAT must be recommendation enough to her husband ."
whispered Mary very audibly .
To her he looked for comfort ; and her assurances of safety , her representation of the excellence of the horses , and of James , and of their having so many friends about them , revived him a little .
Well , and how did Mr . Churchill take it ?"
" I have no doubt of it ," replied Marianne .
" Well , and how soon will he be ready ?-- For it seems all to depend upon that ."
" The post - office is a wonderful establishment !"
Emma could not feel a doubt of having given Harriet ' s fancy a proper direction and raised the gratitude of her young vanity to a very good purpose , for she found her decidedly more sensible than before of Mr . Elton ' s being a remarkably handsome man , with most agreeable manners ; and as she had no hesitation in following up the assurance of his admiration by agreeable hints , she was soon pretty confident of creating as much liking on Harriet ' s side , as there could be any occasion for .
Was it not enough to make the fool of me which I appeared ?
Their visitors , except those from Barton Park , were not many ; for , in spite of Sir John ' s urgent entreaties that they would mix more in the neighbourhood , and repeated assurances of his carriage being always at their service , the independence of Mrs . Dashwood ' s spirit overcame the wish of society for her children ; and she was resolute in declining to visit any family beyond the distance of a walk .
" Oh !
" No -- he should not eat .
Such were Elizabeth Elliot ' s sentiments and sensations ; such the cares to alloy , the agitations to vary , the sameness and the elegance , the prosperity and the nothingness of her scene of life ; such the feelings to give interest to a long , uneventful residence in one country circle , to fill the vacancies which there were no habits of utility abroad , no talents or accomplishments for home , to occupy .
It is not every body that would have stood out in such a kind way as she did , and refuse to take Jane ' s answer ; but she positively declared she would _not_ write any such denial yesterday , as Jane wished her ; she would wait -- and , sure enough , yesterday evening it was all settled that Jane should go .
Where is she ?-- Oh !
Mrs . Dashwood entered into all their feelings with a warmth which left her no inclination for checking this excessive display of them .
CHAPTER I
He staid an hour with them .
" Lord bless you , my dear !-- Sure you do not mean to persuade me that the Colonel only marries you for the sake of giving ten guineas to Mr .
he could spare so considerable a sum with little inconvenience ."
and so late !
This was too true for contradiction .
Invite him to dinner , Emma , and help him to the best of the fish and the chicken , but leave him to chuse his own wife .
He was not an ill - tempered man , not so often unreasonably cross as to deserve such a reproach ; but his temper was not his great perfection ; and , indeed , with such a worshipping wife , it was hardly possible that any natural defects in it should not be increased .
God be praised !-- But is it true ?
It had been the effect of over - persuasion .
So I would advise you two , to set off for town , when you are tired of Barton , without saying a word to Miss Dashwood about it ."
" Perhaps I ought to have reasoned thus ," he replied , " but I could not .
She has not the open temper which a man would wish for in a wife ."
" There now ," said Miss Steele , affectedly simpering , " everybody laughs at me so about the Doctor , and I cannot think why .
Emma wondered on what , of all the medley , she would fix .
Poor Edward !
said Mrs Musgrove to Mrs Croft .
Shall I ?-- Yes , I will -- I declare I will -- and you shall see how she takes it ;-- whether she colours ."
The contempt which she had , very early in their acquaintance , felt for her daughter - in - law , was very much increased by the farther knowledge of her character , which half a year ' s residence in her family afforded ; and perhaps in spite of every consideration of politeness or maternal affection on the side of the former , the two ladies might have found it impossible to have lived together so long , had not a particular circumstance occurred to give still greater eligibility , according to the opinions of Mrs . Dashwood , to her daughters ' continuance at Norland .
" No ," returned Elinor , cautious of giving her real opinion of Edward ' s mother , and not very desirous of satisfying what seemed impertinent curiosity -- " I know nothing of her ."
I have heard her every year of our lives since we both began .
I wonder you should think it possible for me to have such feelings .
Goldsmith tells us , that when lovely woman stoops to folly , she has nothing to do but to die ; and when she stoops to be disagreeable , it is equally to be recommended as a clearer of ill - fame .
To restrain him as much as might be , by her own manners , she was immediately preparing to speak with exquisite calmness and gravity of the weather and the night ; but scarcely had she begun , scarcely had they passed the sweep - gate and joined the other carriage , than she found her subject cut up -- her hand seized -- her attention demanded , and Mr . Elton actually making violent love to her : availing himself of the precious opportunity , declaring sentiments which must be already well known , hoping -- fearing -- adoring -- ready to die if she refused him ; but flattering himself that his ardent attachment and unequalled love and unexampled passion could not fail of having some effect , and in short , very much resolved on being seriously accepted as soon as possible .
said Anne .
" Upon my soul it is ,"-- was his answer , with a warmth which brought all the former Willoughby to her remembrance , and in spite of herself made her think him sincere .
This will be complete enjoyment ; and I do not know , Mrs . Elton , whether the uncertainty of our meetings , the sort of constant expectation there will be of his coming in to - day or to - morrow , and at any hour , may not be more friendly to happiness than having him actually in the house .
Yes , Harriet , just so long have I been wanting the very circumstance to happen what has happened .
I trust to being in charity with her soon .
Elinor thought it wisest to make no answer to this , lest they might provoke each other to an unsuitable increase of ease and unreserve ; and was even partly determined never to mention the subject again .
He wished the road might be impassable , that he might be able to keep them all at Randalls ; and with the utmost good - will was sure that accommodation might be found for every body , calling on his wife to agree with him , that with a little contrivance , every body might be lodged , which she hardly knew how to do , from the consciousness of there being but two spare rooms in the house .
I am sure your mother will not object to it ; for I have had such good luck in getting my own children off my hands that she will think me a very fit person to have the charge of you ; and if I don ' t get one of you at least well married before I have done with you , it shall not be my fault .
Her silence disturbed him ; and after observing her a little while , he added ,
Do not let any reflection fall on the principles or the care of the friends who brought me up .
Elinor had heard enough , if not to gratify her vanity , and raise her self - importance , to agitate her nerves and fill her mind ;-- and she was therefore glad to be spared from the necessity of saying much in reply herself , and from the danger of hearing any thing more from her brother , by the entrance of Mr . Robert Ferrars .
" My engagements at present ," replied Willoughby , confusedly , " are of such a nature -- that -- I dare not flatter myself "--
Marianne , who had never much toleration for any thing like impertinence , vulgarity , inferiority of parts , or even difference of taste from herself , was at this time particularly ill - disposed , from the state of her spirits , to be pleased with the Miss Steeles , or to encourage their advances ; and to the invariable coldness of her behaviour towards them , which checked every endeavour at intimacy on their side , Elinor principally attributed that preference of herself which soon became evident in the manners of both , but especially of Lucy , who missed no opportunity of engaging her in conversation , or of striving to improve their acquaintance by an easy and frank communication of her sentiments .
We see nothing of them , and this is really an instance of gross inattention .
With the exception of this little blot , Emma found that his visit hitherto had given her friend only good ideas of him .
This violent oppression of spirits continued the whole evening .
She proved to be the daughter of a tradesman , rich enough to afford her the comfortable maintenance which had ever been hers , and decent enough to have always wished for concealment .-- Such was the blood of gentility which Emma had formerly been so ready to vouch for !-- It was likely to be as untainted , perhaps , as the blood of many a gentleman : but what a connexion had she been preparing for Mr . Knightley -- or for the Churchills -- or even for Mr .
Emma spoke her pity so very kindly , that with a sudden accession of gay thought , he cried ,
I am sure it was a source of high entertainment to you , to feel that you were taking us all in .-- Perhaps I am the readier to suspect , because , to tell you the truth , I think it might have been some amusement to myself in the same situation .
Mrs . Stokes ,' said I -- but I had not time for more ."
" Have you ever seen the lady ?"
Emma and Harriet had been walking together one morning , and , in Emma ' s opinion , had been talking enough of Mr . Elton for that day .
All that she could hope , was that Edward would not often expose her or himself to the distress of hearing Marianne ' s mistaken warmth , nor to the repetition of any other part of the pain that had attended their recent meeting -- and this she had every reason to expect .
--
Mr . Knightley , one moment more ; something of consequence -- so shocked !-- Jane and I are both so shocked about the apples !"
I could not have believed it !
Anne had been ashamed to appear to comprehend so soon as she really did ; but now she could safely suggest the name of " Louisa ."
She frequently gave me hints of it .
He was preparing only to bow and pass on , but her gentle " How do you do ?"
I am almost ashamed to say it ."
Well , I went , left all that I loved , and went to those to whom , at best , I was only indifferent .
" At present ," continued Elinor , " he regrets what he has done .
Do as you please ."
He was not allowed to escape , however .
She had soon fixed on the size and sort of portrait .
But since he must be absent some time or other , I do not perceive how he can ever be secure while she holds her present influence .
And Lady Middleton , is SHE angry ?"
Captain Benwick was most considerately attentive to her ; and , united as they all seemed by the distress of the day , she felt an increasing degree of good - will towards him , and a pleasure even in thinking that it might , perhaps , be the occasion of continuing their acquaintance .
but one never does form a just idea of any body beforehand .
Her mind was so much weakened that she still fancied present exertion impossible , and therefore it only dispirited her more .
She looked up at him for a moment , coloured deeply , and played something else .
" He must wish her good night ; he was going ; he should get home as fast as he could ."
The ground covered with snow , and the atmosphere in that unsettled state between frost and thaw , which is of all others the most unfriendly for exercise , every morning beginning in rain or snow , and every evening setting in to freeze , she was for many days a most honourable prisoner .
Marianne restored to life , health , friends , and to her doting mother , was an idea to fill her heart with sensations of exquisite comfort , and expand it in fervent gratitude ;-- but it lead to no outward demonstrations of joy , no words , no smiles .
We were very wrong before ; we will be cautious now .-- He is your superior , no doubt , and there do seem objections and obstacles of a very serious nature ; but yet , Harriet , more wonderful things have taken place , there have been matches of greater disparity .
Marianne ' s countenance was more communicative .
" I believe about two thousand a year ."
Good bye ,-- God bless you !"
Every body knows what is due to _you_ ."
I had been too deeply concerned in the mischief to be soon at peace .
CHAPTER XII
do not you know who Miss Williams is ?
I think he is just the person to do it , even without being in love ."
No , he would sooner quit Kellynch Hall at once , than remain in it on such disgraceful terms ."
On one side you look across the bowling - green , behind the house , to a beautiful hanging wood , and on the other you have a view of the church and village , and , beyond them , of those fine bold hills that we have so often admired .
To give you another instance of her liberality :-- The other day , as soon as we came to town , aware that money could not be very plenty with us just now , she put bank - notes into Fanny ' s hands to the amount of two hundred pounds .
Every thing he did , was right .
It had been weakness and timidity .
I had not recollected it before , I declare , but it must be very bad .
When Edward ' s unhappy match takes place , depend upon it his mother will feel as much as if she had never discarded him ; and , therefore every circumstance that may accelerate that dreadful event , must be concealed from her as much as possible .
When once it had been read , there was no doing any thing , but lament and exclaim .
" Yes , here I am , my good friend ; and here I have been so long , that anywhere else I should think it necessary to apologise ; but , the truth is , that I am waiting for my lord and master .
I do not advise the custard .
" Mr . Palmer does not hear me ," said she , laughing ; " he never does sometimes .
I am in no hurry .
but why so ?-- I can hardly imagine that any thing which pleases or amuses you , should not please and amuse me too ."
She instantly wrote Sir John Middleton her acknowledgment of his kindness , and her acceptance of his proposal ; and then hastened to shew both letters to her daughters , that she might be secure of their approbation before her answer were sent .
During his present short stay , Emma had barely seen him ; but just enough to feel that the first meeting was over , and to give her the impression of his not being improved by the mixture of pique and pretension , now spread over his air .
It came from Mr Elliot .
" A very pretty trick you have been playing me , upon my word !
I never could have supposed it .
My dear Emma , we must consider this .
" My dearest papa !
" Now , Palmer , you shall see a monstrous pretty girl ."
In hastily forming and giving his opinion of other people , in sacrificing general politeness to the enjoyment of undivided attention where his heart was engaged , and in slighting too easily the forms of worldly propriety , he displayed a want of caution which Elinor could not approve , in spite of all that he and Marianne could say in its support .
The flaring lamps of a carriage were immediately in view .
the letter had much better be all your own .
Elinor would not vouchsafe any answer .
There had been a time also when Emma would have been sorry to see Harriet in a spot so favourable for the Abbey Mill Farm ; but now she feared it not .
I will take it home with me at night ."
" Do you know where they came from ?"
I shall hear of every thing that is going on among you .
But they had no curiosity to see how Mr . and Mrs . Palmer ate their dinner , and no expectation of pleasure from them in any other way .
" Our situations have borne little resemblance ."
If I find him conversable , I shall be glad of his acquaintance ; but if he is only a chattering coxcomb , he will not occupy much of my time or thoughts ."
Her carefulness in guarding her sister from ever hearing Willoughby ' s name mentioned , was not thrown away .
Will you not sit down ?
And that I fancy , will be the end of it .
So , there was I , crowded into the back seat with Henrietta and Louise ; and I think it very likely that my illness to - day may be owing to it ."
My mother is so delighted !-- for she is to be three months with us at least .
They were , of course , very anxious to see a person on whom so much of their comfort at Barton must depend ; and the elegance of her appearance was favourable to their wishes .
he is quite smitten already , and he is very well worth setting your cap at , I can tell you , in spite of all this tumbling about and spraining of ankles ."
and I have often wished -- but it is so little one can venture to do -- small , trifling presents , of any thing uncommon -- Now we have killed a porker , and Emma thinks of sending them a loin or a leg ; it is very small and delicate -- Hartfield pork is not like any other pork -- but still it is pork -- and , my dear Emma , unless one could be sure of their making it into steaks , nicely fried , as ours are fried , without the smallest grease , and not roast it , for no stomach can bear roast pork -- I think we had better send the leg -- do not you think so , my dear ?"
I did not see you before .
Mrs . Jennings received the information with a great deal of joy , and many assurances of kindness and care ; nor was it a matter of pleasure merely to her .
and Mr Elliot so anxious that he should !"
my dear mother , you must be wrong in permitting an engagement between a daughter so young , a man so little known , to be carried on in so doubtful , so mysterious a manner !
If dancing formed the amusement of the night , they were partners for half the time ; and when obliged to separate for a couple of dances , were careful to stand together and scarcely spoke a word to any body else .
After some opposition , Marianne yielded to her sister ' s entreaties , and consented to go out with her and Mrs . Jennings one morning for half an hour .
She has been gone longer already than she intended ."
We are to walk about your gardens , and gather the strawberries ourselves , and sit under trees ;-- and whatever else you may like to provide , it is to be all out of doors -- a table spread in the shade , you know .
" To be sure he is .
Her thoughts were silently fixed on the irreparable injury which too early an independence and its consequent habits of idleness , dissipation , and luxury , had made in the mind , the character , the happiness , of a man who , to every advantage of person and talents , united a disposition naturally open and honest , and a feeling , affectionate temper .
" He will sit poring over his book , and not know when a person speaks to him , or when one drop ' s one ' s scissors , or anything that happens .
Mrs . Dashwood immediately took all that trouble on herself ; and Elinor had the benefit of the information without the exertion of seeking it .
" Yes ; Mr . Pratt .
Had she not imagined herself consulting his good , even more than her own , she could hardly have given him up .
In the country , an unpremeditated dance was very allowable ; but in London , where the reputation of elegance was more important and less easily attained , it was risking too much for the gratification of a few girls , to have it known that Lady Middleton had given a small dance of eight or nine couple , with two violins , and a mere side - board collation .
He was silent and grave .
" I assure you she did .
If I would not go for the sake of your father , I should think it scandalous to go for the sake of his heir .
" Do come now ," said he --" pray come -- you must come -- I declare you shall come -- You can ' t think how you will like them .
So much novelty and beauty !
Now , Mr . Knightley , a word or two more , and I have done .
As to her illness , all nothing of course .
Ninety - nine out of a hundred would do the same .
Her fortune was large , and our family estate much encumbered .
Letters are no matter of indifference ; they are generally a very positive curse ."
Musgrove , either you or I must go ."
If there is anything disagreeable going on men are always sure to get out of it , and Charles is as bad as any of them .
Had I died ,-- it would have been self - destruction .
If you look across the street , you will see Admiral Brand coming down and his brother .
Mrs . Weston , you would be quite laid up ; do not let them talk of such a wild thing .
It was settled that they should go to Box Hill .
Will you be so good as to tell him that the living of Delaford , now just vacant , as I am informed by this day ' s post , is his , if he think it worth his acceptance -- but THAT , perhaps , so unfortunately circumstanced as he is now , it may be nonsense to appear to doubt ; I only wish it were more valuable .-- It is a rectory , but a small one ; the late incumbent , I believe , did not make more than 200 L per annum , and though it is certainly capable of improvement , I fear , not to such an amount as to afford him a very comfortable income .
My cousins say they are sure I have made a conquest ; but for my part I declare I never think about him from one hour ' s end to another .
This long meadow bordered a lane , which their footpath , at the end of it was to cross , and when the party had all reached the gate of exit , the carriage advancing in the same direction , which had been some time heard , was just coming up , and proved to be Admiral Croft ' s gig .
--
He could only plead an ignorance of his own heart , and a mistaken confidence in the force of his engagement .
--" The best of all .
" We will not allow her to do such a thing again :"-- and nodding significantly --" there must be some arrangement made , there must indeed .
Oh , for shame !-- To be sure you must know better than that .
It was the offer of a small house , on very easy terms , belonging to a relation of her own , a gentleman of consequence and property in Devonshire .
Domestic happiness is out of the question .
It was impossible for her to have forgotten to feel that this arrival of their common friends must be soon bringing them together again .
_Now_ , he said , he was beginning to have no longer the same wish .
Mr Elliot ' s speech , too , distressed her .
With these supports , she hoped that the acquaintance between herself and the Crofts , which , with Lady Russell , still resident in Kellynch , and Mary fixed only three miles off , must be anticipated , need not involve any particular awkwardness .
She had something to suffer , perhaps , when they came into contact again , in seeing Anne restored to the rights of seniority , and the mistress of a very pretty landaulette ; but she had a future to look forward to , of powerful consolation .
" I am glad you approve of what I have done ," said he very comfortably .
Neither father nor mother could promote , and the daughter could not endure it .
No , she had had enough of interference .
Can you think your friend behindhand in these sort of considerations ?
This had just taken place and with great cordiality , when John Knightley made his appearance , and " How d ' ye do , George ?"
There she felt her own inferiority very keenly .
She could tell nothing of Hartfield , in which Mrs . Weston had not a lively concern ; and half an hour ' s uninterrupted communication of all those little matters on which the daily happiness of private life depends , was one of the first gratifications of each .
My acquaintance is so very extensive , that I have little doubt of hearing of something to suit her shortly .-- I shall introduce her , of course , very particularly to my brother and sister when they come to us .
Jane looked as if she did not mean to be conquered ; but instead of answering , she began speaking again to Mr . John Knightley .
Mrs . Jennings laughed heartily ; and Elinor found that in her resolution to know where they had been , she had actually made her own woman enquire of Mr . Willoughby ' s groom ; and that she had by that method been informed that they had gone to Allenham , and spent a considerable time there in walking about the garden and going all over the house .
He only means --"
" Ah !
" I hope not , I believe not ," cried Elinor .
Emma grieved that she could not be more openly just to one important service which his better sense would have rendered her , to the advice which would have saved her from the worst of all her womanly follies -- her wilful intimacy with Harriet Smith ; but it was too tender a subject .-- She could not enter on it .-- Harriet was very seldom mentioned between them .
Dare say you heard the carriage , sir , while you were at dinner ; and going on now for Crewkherne , in his way to Bath and London ."
There was no delay , no waste of time .
" She is pretty , I think ; Anne Elliot ; very pretty , when one comes to look at her .
Elinor , starting back with a look of horror at the sight of him , obeyed the first impulse of her heart in turning instantly to quit the room , and her hand was already on the lock , when its action was suspended by his hastily advancing , and saying , in a voice rather of command than supplication ,
Well !
" I think Lady Russell would like him .
I could not bear the idea of it ; so , as soon as Mr . Weston came into the room , and I could get at him , I spoke to him about the carriage .
I shall speak to Mr . E . The man who fetches our letters every morning ( one of our men , I forget his name ) shall inquire for yours too and bring them to you .
She prized the frank , the open - hearted , the eager character beyond all others .
His aunt could not bear to have him leave her .
-- Women may be as comfortable on board , as in the best house in England .
By that time , it was beginning to hold up , and I was determined that nothing should stop me from getting away -- and then -- only think !-- I found he was coming up towards me too -- slowly you know , and as if he did not quite know what to do ; and so he came and spoke , and I answered -- and I stood for a minute , feeling dreadfully , you know , one can ' t tell how ; and then I took courage , and said it did not rain , and I must go ; and so off I set ; and I had not got three yards from the door , when he came after me , only to say , if I was going to Hartfield , he thought I had much better go round by Mr . Cole ' s stables , for I should find the near way quite floated by this rain .
What other reason for the disclosure of the affair could there be , but that Elinor might be informed by it of Lucy ' s superior claims on Edward , and be taught to avoid him in future ?
But then Patty came in , and said it was you .
That tooth of her ' s and those freckles .
cried Mrs . Jennings , as soon as she was gone , " how it grieves me to see her !
Woodhouse ?-- I am so glad to hear such a good account .
" Upon my word , Emma ."
Mrs Smith had been able to tell her what no one else could have done .
Of Elinor ' s distress , she was too busily employed in measuring lengths of worsted for her rug , to see any thing at all ; and calmly continuing her talk , as soon as Marianne disappeared , she said ,
It was done however .
Her character was now fixed on his mind as perfection itself , maintaining the loveliest medium of fortitude and gentleness ; but he was obliged to acknowledge that only at Uppercross had he learnt to do her justice , and only at Lyme had he begun to understand himself .
And on Mrs Musgrove ' s side , it was , " I make a rule of never interfering in any of my daughter - in - law ' s concerns , for I know it would not do ; but I shall tell you , Miss Anne , because you may be able to set things to rights , that I have no very good opinion of Mrs Charles ' s nursery - maid : I hear strange stories of her ; she is always upon the gad ; and from my own knowledge , I can declare , she is such a fine - dressing lady , that she is enough to ruin any servants she comes near .
I told you he was plain ."
Mrs . Jennings repeated her assurance that Mrs . Dashwood could spare them perfectly well ; and Elinor , who now understood her sister , and saw to what indifference to almost every thing else she was carried by her eagerness to be with Willoughby again , made no farther direct opposition to the plan , and merely referred it to her mother ' s decision , from whom however she scarcely expected to receive any support in her endeavour to prevent a visit , which she could not approve of for Marianne , and which on her own account she had particular reasons to avoid .
While waiting till the other young people could pair themselves off , Emma found time , in spite of the compliments she was receiving on her voice and her taste , to look about , and see what became of Mr . Knightley .
Captain Wentworth had no fortune .
Their favour increased ; they could not be spared ; Sir John would not hear of their going ; and in spite of their numerous and long arranged engagements in Exeter , in spite of the absolute necessity of returning to fulfill them immediately , which was in full force at the end of every week , they were prevailed on to stay nearly two months at the park , and to assist in the due celebration of that festival which requires a more than ordinary share of private balls and large dinners to proclaim its importance .
And with these words , he almost ran out of the room .
Her accommodations were limited to a noisy parlour , and a dark bedroom behind , with no possibility of moving from one to the other without assistance , which there was only one servant in the house to afford , and she never quitted the house but to be conveyed into the warm bath .
She knows now what gentlemen are ; and nothing but a gentleman in education and manner has any chance with Harriet ."
I am only afraid of your sitting up for me .
" No , not all ," answered Marianne ; " we could not be more unfortunately situated ."
He was silent .
The passing admiration of Mr Elliot had at least roused him , and the scenes on the Cobb and at Captain Harville ' s had fixed her superiority .
Only one page more .
***
And yet it was far , very far , from impossible .-- Was it a new circumstance for a man of first - rate abilities to be captivated by very inferior powers ?
What a blow upon them all was this !
" Yes ; it is about Miss Williams , I am sure ."
I dare say you have seen enough of Edward to know that he would prefer the church to every other profession ; now my plan is that he should take orders as soon as he can , and then through your interest , which I am sure you would be kind enough to use out of friendship for him , and I hope out of some regard to me , your brother might be persuaded to give him Norland living ; which I understand is a very good one , and the present incumbent not likely to live a great while .
" Very serious !
Emma grew sick at the sound .
cried Marianne , indignantly .
( turning to Emma .)
" Your feelings may be the strongest ," replied Anne , " but the same spirit of analogy will authorise me to assert that ours are the most tender .
She spoke with great agitation ; and Emma very feelingly replied , " That can be no reason for your being exposed to danger now .
" No , sir ," cried Emma , " it confesses no such thing .
she replied with spirited earnestness , though her eyes were filled with tears as she spoke , " don ' t think of MY health .
Selina , who is mild almost to a fault , bore with them much better ."
While she with the truest affection had been planning a most eligible connection for him , was it to be supposed that he could be all the time secretly engaged to another person !-- such a suspicion could never have entered her head !
" I had not thought of that .
When we met him , he turned back and walked with us ; and so we began talking of my brother and sister , and one thing and another , and I said to him , ' So , Colonel , there is a new family come to Barton cottage , I hear , and mama sends me word they are very pretty , and that one of them is going to be married to Mr . Willoughby of Combe Magna .
The time of year lightened the evil to him .
Emma was rather in dismay when only half a minute afterwards he began to speak of other things , and in a voice of the greatest alacrity and enjoyment .
It is the greatest amusement in the world !
But is not this a sudden scheme ?"
asked Marianne .
When is a man to be safe from such wit , if age and infirmity will not protect him ?"
He did so , but very soon stopt again to say , " the pianoforte !
Mama , the more I know of the world , the more am I convinced that I shall never see a man whom I can really love .
Mrs . Jennings directly gave her the gratifying assurance that she certainly would NOT , and Miss Steele was made completely happy .
And now , after only ten minutes notice -- Gone too without intending to return !-- Something more than what be owned to us must have happened .
He thought much of the evils of the journey for her , and not a little of the fatigues of his own horses and coachman who were to bring some of the party the last half of the way ; but his alarms were needless ; the sixteen miles being happily accomplished , and Mr . and Mrs . John Knightley , their five children , and a competent number of nursery - maids , all reaching Hartfield in safety .
After very little farther discourse , it was finally settled that the invitation should be fully accepted .
Will it make you happy ?
" Are you well , my Emma ?"
" I wrote to him , my love , last week , and rather expect to see , than to hear from him again .
" No .
I always make a point of reading Jane ' s letters through to myself first , before I read them aloud to my mother , you know , for fear of there being any thing in them to distress her .
I will tell you exactly what I think ."
" No ," cried Anne , quickly , " it cannot be Mr Elliot , I assure you .
He had a pleasing face and a melancholy air , just as he ought to have , and drew back from conversation .
" I have heard her speak of the acquaintance ," said Emma ; " she is a very elegant young woman ."
" My first enjoyment ," replied John Knightley , as they passed through the sweep - gate , " will be to find myself safe at Hartfield again ."
" I had only my own family to study from .
I have never seen either Mr . or Mrs . Elton .
Elinor , while she waited in silence and immovable gravity , the conclusion of such folly , could not restrain her eyes from being fixed on him with a look that spoke all the contempt it excited .
Mr Elliot ' s having any views on me will not in the least account for the efforts he made towards a reconciliation with my father .
Willoughby was all that her fancy had delineated in that unhappy hour and in every brighter period , as capable of attaching her ; and his behaviour declared his wishes to be in that respect as earnest , as his abilities were strong .
Remember ."
It will be quite delightful !-- My love ," applying to her husband , " don ' t you long to have the Miss Dashwoods come to Cleveland ?"
Do you suppose she does not often say all this to herself ?
To complete every other recommendation , he had _almost_ told her that he loved her .
By your account , he does seem to have had some scruples .
This only need be said ;-- that when they all sat down to table at four o ' clock , about three hours after his arrival , he had secured his lady , engaged her mother ' s consent , and was not only in the rapturous profession of the lover , but , in the reality of reason and truth , one of the happiest of men .
Elinor ' s delight , as she saw what each felt in the meeting , was only checked by an apprehension of its robbing Marianne of farther sleep ;-- but Mrs . Dashwood could be calm , could be even prudent , when the life of a child was at stake , and Marianne , satisfied in knowing her mother was near her , and conscious of being too weak for conversation , submitted readily to the silence and quiet prescribed by every nurse around her .
There was a little hesitation in Emma ' s answer .
Unjust I may have been , weak and resentful I have been , but never inconstant .
Such was her situation , with a vacant space at hand , when Captain Wentworth was again in sight .
He spoke to her , and then turned away .
Would Jane but go , means were to be found , servants sent , friends contrived -- no travelling difficulty allowed to exist ; but still she had declined it !
" My dear madam ," said Lady Middleton , " recollect what you are saying ."
It is very difficult for the prosperous to be humble .
Anne haggard , Mary coarse , every face in the neighbourhood worsting , and the rapid increase of the crow ' s foot about Lady Russell ' s temples had long been a distress to him .
What are they saying about Mr .
" I shall always think myself very much obliged to you ."
" Pray do .
You do not mean it ?"
He went to Highbury the next morning , and satisfied himself on that point .
It was no more than a wish .
she was considerably worse from this reappearance of Mr . Elton .
It is evident , in spite of his frequent attention to her while she draws , that in fact he knows nothing of the matter .
He might not be aware of the inroads on domestic peace to be occasioned by no housekeeper ' s room , or a bad butler ' s pantry , but no doubt he did perfectly feel that Enscombe could not make him happy , and that whenever he were attached , he would willingly give up much of wealth to be allowed an early establishment .
To know that Marianne was in town was -- in the same language -- a thunderbolt .-- Thunderbolts and daggers !-- what a reproof would she have given me !-- her taste , her opinions -- I believe they are better known to me than my own ,-- and I am sure they are dearer ."
This hint was enough , Lucy recollected herself instantly and replied , " Indeed you are very much mistaken , Lady Middleton ; I am only waiting to know whether you can make your party without me , or I should have been at my filigree already .
and Lord help ' em !
In the hope of diverting her father ' s thoughts from the disagreeableness of Mr . Knightley ' s going to London ; and going so suddenly ; and going on horseback , which she knew would be all very bad ; Emma communicated her news of Jane Fairfax , and her dependence on the effect was justified ; it supplied a very useful check ,-- interested , without disturbing him .
" Dear me !
" She must be very lively , and have hazle eyes .
The man and one of the maids were sent off immediately into Devonshire , to prepare the house for their mistress ' s arrival ; for as Lady Middleton was entirely unknown to Mrs . Dashwood , she preferred going directly to the cottage to being a visitor at Barton Park ; and she relied so undoubtingly on Sir John ' s description of the house , as to feel no curiosity to examine it herself till she entered it as her own .
" You judged from your knowledge of the Colonel ' s general benevolence ; but at least you could not foresee that the opportunity would so very soon occur ."
My daughter and I are both highly sensible of your goodness , and have the greatest satisfaction in seeing you at Hartfield ."
-- But ever since we had the history of that day , I have been so fond of Mr .
If meant to be immediately mixed with the others , and buried from sight , she should have looked on the table instead of looking just across , for it was not mixed ; and Harriet , eager after every fresh word , and finding out none , directly took it up , and fell to work .
" To be sure , so it is .
And so excellent in the Church !
Even if this family , the Braithwaites , are put off , I am still afraid that some excuse may be found for disappointing us .
When is it to take place ?"
What is it ?-- why do you smile so ?-- where did you hear it ?-- at Randalls ?"
She had hurried on before her guests to prepare her father for their appearance , and was beyond the reach of Mr . Weston ' s hint .
And why does he regret it ?-- Because he finds it has not answered towards himself .
Weston .-- " Very well , I thank you , ma ' am .
But Edward had no turn for great men or barouches .
Their man - servant had been sent one morning to Exeter on business ; and when , as he waited at table , he had satisfied the inquiries of his mistress as to the event of his errand , this was his voluntary communication --
Emma was soon perfectly satisfied of Mr . Martin ' s being no otherwise remembered , than as he furnished a contrast with Mr . Elton , of the utmost advantage to the latter .
Such a heart -- such a Harriet !
At nineteen , you know , one does not think very seriously ; but Mr Elliot appeared to me quite as good as others , and much more agreeable than most others , and we were almost always together .
I consider him , on the contrary , as a very respectable man , who has every body ' s good word , and nobody ' s notice ; who , has more money than he can spend , more time than he knows how to employ , and two new coats every year ."
" Whom do you mean , ma ' am ?"
I could not stay two minutes .
He received the kindest welcome from her ; and shyness , coldness , reserve could not stand against such a reception .
But could it be so ?
I do think he had better leave Uppercross entirely , and fix at Lyme .
Elinor only was sorry to see them .
But Marianne abhorred all concealment where no real disgrace could attend unreserve ; and to aim at the restraint of sentiments which were not in themselves illaudable , appeared to her not merely an unnecessary effort , but a disgraceful subjection of reason to common - place and mistaken notions .
" Ah !
That evening seemed to be made up of exquisite moments .
Everything that revolts other people , low company , paltry rooms , foul air , disgusting associations are inviting to you .
Emma turned round to look at her in consternation , and hastily said ,
They were reckoning him as certain , but with her it was a gnawing solicitude never appeased for five minutes together .
The scenes in its neighbourhood , Charmouth , with its high grounds and extensive sweeps of country , and still more , its sweet , retired bay , backed by dark cliffs , where fragments of low rock among the sands , make it the happiest spot for watching the flow of the tide , for sitting in unwearied contemplation ; the woody varieties of the cheerful village of Up Lyme ; and , above all , Pinny , with its green chasms between romantic rocks , where the scattered forest trees and orchards of luxuriant growth , declare that many a generation must have passed away since the first partial falling of the cliff prepared the ground for such a state , where a scene so wonderful and so lovely is exhibited , as may more than equal any of the resembling scenes of the far - famed Isle of Wight : these places must be visited , and visited again , to make the worth of Lyme understood .
There probably _was_ something more to conceal than her own preference ; Mr . Dixon , perhaps , had been very near changing one friend for the other , or been fixed only to Miss Campbell , for the sake of the future twelve thousand pounds .
" And here is Mrs . Weston and Mr . Frank Churchill too !-- Quite delightful ; so many friends !"
Every body was punctual , every body in their best looks : not a tear , and hardly a long face to be seen .
So , Lady Russell would not get out .
He and Mrs . Weston were both dreadfully desponding .
" It is Colonel Brandon !"
" I cannot bear to have you think me impertinently curious .
They are a very respectable family , Mr . Ferrars ; and towards us have behaved in the friendliest manner .
" You have probably entirely forgotten a conversation -- ( it is not to be supposed that it could make any impression on you )-- a conversation between us one evening at Barton Park -- it was the evening of a dance -- in which I alluded to a lady I had once known , as resembling , in some measure , your sister Marianne ."
I have not forgotten it , I assure you .-- Deceived myself , I did very miserably deceive you -- and it will be a painful reflection to me for ever .
" Aye -- like Maple Grove , I dare say .
I shall now go away and live in dread of one event ."
" Of all horrid things , leave - taking is the worst ."
" Four months !-- and yet you loved him !"
Emma could not speak the name of Dixon without a little blush .
It saves trouble , and is a something to get me out .
Now , I can think and speak of it with little emotion .
He had inquired after her , she found , slightly , as might suit a former slight acquaintance , seeming to acknowledge such as she had acknowledged , actuated , perhaps , by the same view of escaping introduction when they were to meet .
I called her a distant relation ; but I am well aware that I have in general been suspected of a much nearer connection with her .
It can be round in five minutes ."
He LOOKED all the astonishment which such unexpected , such unthought - of information could not fail of exciting ; but he said only these two words ,
He wished him at the devil with all his heart .
There has been a solemn engagement between them ever since October -- formed at Weymouth , and kept a secret from every body .
Though I have forgot the exact terms , I have a perfect impression of the general meaning .
The subject followed ; it was in plain , unaffected , gentlemanlike English , such as Mr . Knightley used even to the woman he was in love with , how to be able to ask her to marry him , without attacking the happiness of her father .
CHAPTER 24
" Is Miss Woodhouse sure that she would like to hear what we are all thinking of ?"
From situation , Mrs Clay was , in Lady Russell ' s estimate , a very unequal , and in her character she believed a very dangerous companion ; and a removal that would leave Mrs Clay behind , and bring a choice of more suitable intimates within Miss Elliot ' s reach , was therefore an object of first - rate importance .
If Louisa Musgrove would be beautiful and happy in her November of life , she will cherish all her present powers of mind ."
What right had he to come among us with affection and faith engaged , and with manners so _very_ disengaged ?
A glance or two between him and his wife , convinced him that all was as right as this speech proclaimed ; and its happy effect on his spirits was immediate .
The good lady had not given me the possibility of escape before ."
You will find Margaret so improved when you come back again !
I am not prejudiced ."
Good gracious !-- In a moment I shall see the person that all my happiness depends on -- that is to be my mother !"
And her mother too , Mrs . Ferrars , a very good - natured woman , I am sure it would give her great pleasure ; she said as much the other day ."
Blessed with so many resources within myself , the world was not necessary to _me_ .
Some people were always cross when they were hot .
my dear ,' said I -- well , and just then came the note .
He ought not to be supposed to be paying his addresses to any one ."
If I had but her memory !
" But why should you think ," said Lucy , looking ashamed of her sister , " that there are not as many genteel young men in Devonshire as Sussex ?"
If this is living in the country , it is nothing very formidable .
He was full of ` to - morrow ,' and it is very evident that I have been full of it too , ever since I entered the house , and learnt the extension of your plan and all that had happened , or my seeing him could never have gone so entirely out of my head ."
Marianne told her , with the greatest delight , that Willoughby had given her a horse , one that he had bred himself on his estate in Somersetshire , and which was exactly calculated to carry a woman .
The danger would have been of my wearying you .
" But , my dear sir ," cried Mr . Weston , " if Emma comes away early , it will be breaking up the party ."
" Poor girl !"
" It is my duty , and I am sure it is my wish ," she continued , " to have no reserves with you on this subject .
Not a speck on them ."
" And his manners , the Colonel ' s manners are not only more pleasing to me than Willoughby ' s ever were , but they are of a kind I well know to be more solidly attaching to Marianne .
Poor Mr . Elton !
Once she did contrive to push him away , but the boy had the greater pleasure in getting upon her back again directly .
His mother is perfectly right not to be in a hurry .
As to Captain Wentworth ' s views , she deemed it of more consequence that he should know his own mind early enough not to be endangering the happiness of either sister , or impeaching his own honour , than that he should prefer Henrietta to Louisa , or Louisa to Henrietta .
The sight of your dear sister , however , was really dreadful ; and , to heighten the matter , I found her alone .
It is not so very likely he should be distressed in his circumstances NOW , for he is a very prudent man , and to be sure must have cleared the estate by this time .
I was snowed up at a friend ' s house once for a week .
That she was not immediately ready , Emma did suspect to arise from the state of her nerves ; she had not yet possessed the instrument long enough to touch it without emotion ; she must reason herself into the power of performance ; and Emma could not but pity such feelings , whatever their origin , and could not but resolve never to expose them to her neighbour again .
" I do so wonder , Miss Woodhouse , that you should not be married , or going to be married !
It was very desirable that the connexion should be renewed , if it could be done , without any compromise of propriety on the side of the Elliots ."
They all three called in Rivers Street for a couple of minutes ; but Anne convinced herself that a day ' s delay of the intended communication could be of no consequence , and hastened forward to the White Hart , to see again the friends and companions of the last autumn , with an eagerness of good - will which many associations contributed to form .
" To - morrow evening , to meet a few friends : no formal party ."
Pray sir ," turning to the waiter , " did not you hear , did not his servant say whether he belonged to the Kellynch family ?"
Emma could not think it too soon ; for with all his good and agreeable qualities , there was a sort of parade in his speeches which was very apt to incline her to laugh .
It was the choicest gift of Heaven ; and Anne viewed her friend as one of those instances in which , by a merciful appointment , it seems designed to counterbalance almost every other want .
His importance at Enscombe was very evident .
She performed her promise of being discreet , to admiration .-- She attended to all that Mrs . Jennings had to say upon the subject , with an unchanging complexion , dissented from her in nothing , and was heard three times to say , " Yes , ma ' am ."
Mr . Martin is now awkward and abrupt ; what will he be at Mr . Weston ' s time of life ?"
The idea of Edward ' s being a clergyman , and living in a small parsonage - house , diverted him beyond measure ;-- and when to that was added the fanciful imagery of Edward reading prayers in a white surplice , and publishing the banns of marriage between John Smith and Mary Brown , he could conceive nothing more ridiculous .
But what did such particulars explain ?-- The fact was , as Emma could now acknowledge , that Harriet had always liked Robert Martin ; and that his continuing to love her had been irresistible .-- Beyond this , it must ever be unintelligible to Emma .
Whatever may have changed him now , ( and nothing but the blackest art employed against me can have done it ), I was once as dear to him as my own soul could wish .
Mrs . Dashwood and Elinor then followed , and the others were left by themselves , to talk of the travellers , and feel their own dullness , till Mrs . Jennings was summoned to her chaise to take comfort in the gossip of her maid for the loss of her two young companions ; and Colonel Brandon immediately afterwards took his solitary way to Delaford .
She was married -- married against her inclination to my brother .
Lady Russell took her out in her carriage almost every morning , and she never failed to think of them , and never failed to see them .
My behaviour must have seemed strange to you then ; but now you will comprehend it .
I assure you it has been the greatest satisfaction , comfort , and delight to me , to hear what a musical society I am got into .
It was no more than the principals were prepared for ; they had calculated from the time of its being known at Randalls , how soon it would be over Highbury ; and were thinking of themselves , as the evening wonder in many a family circle , with great sagacity .
She was looking remarkably well ; her very regular , very pretty features , having the bloom and freshness of youth restored by the fine wind which had been blowing on her complexion , and by the animation of eye which it had also produced .
Mr . Weston is rather an easy , cheerful - tempered man , than a man of strong feelings ; he takes things as he finds them , and makes enjoyment of them somehow or other , depending , I suspect , much more upon what is called society for his comforts , that is , upon the power of eating and drinking , and playing whist with his neighbours five times a week , than upon family affection , or any thing that home affords ."
Mrs . Jennings ' s prophecies , though rather jumbled together , were chiefly fulfilled ; for she was able to visit Edward and his wife in their Parsonage by Michaelmas , and she found in Elinor and her husband , as she really believed , one of the happiest couples in the world .
It was settled that there should be a dance in the evening , and that every body should be extremely merry all day long .
But did you never see him ?
The weather was remarkably fine , and she readily consented .
" So you have been settling that I should marry Jane Fairfax ?"
Elinor assured him that she did ;-- that she forgave , pitied , wished him well -- was even interested in his happiness -- and added some gentle counsel as to the behaviour most likely to promote it .
" She was certainly very civil to you ."
" More than an attachment , indeed ," resumed Mrs . Weston ; " an engagement -- a positive engagement .-- What will you say , Emma -- what will any body say , when it is known that Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax are engaged ;-- nay , that they have been long engaged !"
" I do not attempt to deny ," said she , " that I think very highly of him -- that I greatly esteem , that I like him ."
and by all accounts , it won ' t come before it ' s wanted ; for they say he is all to pieces .
Mrs . Cole was telling that she had been calling on Miss Bates , and as soon as she entered the room had been struck by the sight of a pianoforte -- a very elegant looking instrument -- not a grand , but a large - sized square pianoforte ; and the substance of the story , the end of all the dialogue which ensued of surprize , and inquiry , and congratulations on her side , and explanations on Miss Bates ' s , was , that this pianoforte had arrived from Broadwood ' s the day before , to the great astonishment of both aunt and niece -- entirely unexpected ; that at first , by Miss Bates ' s account , Jane herself was quite at a loss , quite bewildered to think who could possibly have ordered it -- but now , they were both perfectly satisfied that it could be from only one quarter ;-- of course it must be from Colonel Campbell .
Young and gentle as she was , it might yet have been possible to withstand her father ' s ill - will , though unsoftened by one kind word or look on the part of her sister ; but Lady Russell , whom she had always loved and relied on , could not , with such steadiness of opinion , and such tenderness of manner , be continually advising her in vain .
Miss Dashwood , you cannot have an idea of the comfort it gives me to look back on my own misery .
Now , an attachment to Harriet Smith would have nothing to encounter .
Ever since the service he rendered Jane at Weymouth , when they were out in that party on the water , and she , by the sudden whirling round of something or other among the sails , would have been dashed into the sea at once , and actually was all but gone , if he had not , with the greatest presence of mind , caught hold of her habit -- ( I can never think of it without trembling !)
It seemed to announce a different sort of man ."
The rest of the gentlemen being now in the room , Emma found herself obliged to turn from him for a few minutes , and listen to Mr . Cole .
But , now that she has written her letters , she says she shall soon be well .
poor dear ," immediately gave her her salts ; and Sir John felt so desperately enraged against the author of this nervous distress , that he instantly changed his seat to one close by Lucy Steele , and gave her , in a whisper , a brief account of the whole shocking affair .
Both seemed to look to her for directions .
" Colonel and Mrs . Campbell are to be in town again by midsummer ," said Jane .
It was a clear thing he was less in love than he had been .
He coloured very deeply , and giving a momentary glance at Elinor , replied , " Yes ; it is my sister ' s hair .
Elton ?"
He little surmised that it was a subject acting now exactly against his interest , bringing immediately to her thoughts all those parts of his conduct which were least excusable .
I have now a key to all her odd looks and ways .
They are not at all the less written you know , because you divide them .
I have been several times in the garden with Mackenzie , trying to understand , and make him understand , which of Elizabeth ' s plants are for Lady Russell .
He loved to have the cloth laid , because it had been the fashion of his youth , but his conviction of suppers being very unwholesome made him rather sorry to see any thing put on it ; and while his hospitality would have welcomed his visitors to every thing , his care for their health made him grieve that they would eat .
He saw no fault in the room , he would acknowledge none which they suggested .
I am more curious to know why he should be so different now ."
" It is .
His coldness and reserve mortified her severely ; she was vexed and half angry ; but resolving to regulate her behaviour to him by the past rather than the present , she avoided every appearance of resentment or displeasure , and treated him as she thought he ought to be treated from the family connection .
CHAPTER XIV
" Well !
" What do you say to Mrs .
These words , which conveyed to Elinor a direct avowal of his love for her sister , affected her very much .
" I never heard any harm of her ; indeed I hardly ever heard her mentioned ; except that Mrs . Taylor did say this morning , that one day Miss Walker hinted to her , that she believed Mr . and Mrs . Ellison would not be sorry to have Miss Grey married , for she and Mrs . Ellison could never agree ."
" They aimed at wounding more than Harriet ," said he .
CHAPTER 49
But just now she could think only of Captain Wentworth .
" It was short -- merely to announce -- but cheerful , exulting , of course ."
for they say he is monstrous fond of her , as well he may .
" Be satisfied ," said he , " I will not raise any outcry .
Sir John is as stupid as the weather ."
" Ah !
Those whom he has been the chief cause of leading into ruin , he can neglect and desert without the smallest compunction .
I had allowed her , ( imprudently , as it has since turned out ,) at her earnest desire , to go to Bath with one of her young friends , who was attending her father there for his health .
" I hardly know ," replied Captain Wentworth , surprised .
" I know there is such an idea with many people , but indeed it is quite a mistake , sir .-- We all had our health perfectly well there , never found the least inconvenience from the mud ; and Mr . Wingfield says it is entirely a mistake to suppose the place unhealthy ; and I am sure he may be depended on , for he thoroughly understands the nature of the air , and his own brother and family have been there repeatedly ."
They proceed from no misconduct , and can bring no disgrace .
I am doatingly fond of music -- passionately fond ;-- and my friends say I am not entirely devoid of taste ; but as to any thing else , upon my honour my performance is _mediocre_ to the last degree .
In one point , her feelings were relieved by this knowledge of Mr Elliot .
you saw enough for your own amusement .
I don ' t say that it is not a disagreeable business -- but things might be much worse .-- If we walk fast , we shall soon be at Randalls ."
Even Lady Middleton took the trouble of being delighted , which was putting herself rather out of her way ; and as for the Miss Steeles , especially Lucy , they had never been so happy in their lives as this intelligence made them .
Woodhouse , who had already taken his little round in the highest part of the gardens , where no damps from the river were imagined even by him , stirred no more ; and his daughter resolved to remain with him , that Mrs . Weston might be persuaded away by her husband to the exercise and variety which her spirits seemed to need .
By that time , Marianne was rather better , and her mother leaving her to the care of Margaret and the maid , returned to Elinor , who , though still much disordered , had so far recovered the use of her reason and voice as to be just beginning an inquiry of Thomas , as to the source of his intelligence .
One of the least agreeable circumstances of her residence there was her being treated with too much confidence by all parties , and being too much in the secret of the complaints of each house .
I have already met with such success in two applications for pardon , that I may be in danger of thinking myself too sure of yours , and of those among your friends who have had any ground of offence .-- You must all endeavour to comprehend the exact nature of my situation when I first arrived at Randalls ; you must consider me as having a secret which was to be kept at all hazards .
It spoke such perfect amity .-- He left them immediately afterwards -- gone in a moment .
" I hope ," said he presently , " I have not been severe upon poor Mrs . Churchill .
Twelve years had changed Anne from the blooming , silent , unformed girl of fifteen , to the elegant little woman of seven - and - twenty , with every beauty except bloom , and with manners as consciously right as they were invariably gentle ; and twelve years had transformed the fine - looking , well - grown Miss Hamilton , in all the glow of health and confidence of superiority , into a poor , infirm , helpless widow , receiving the visit of her former protegee as a favour ; but all that was uncomfortable in the meeting had soon passed away , and left only the interesting charm of remembering former partialities and talking over old times .
Lady Russell began talking of something else .
And therefore I think I will beg your excuse and take my three turns -- my winter walk ."
" Such a fortnight as it has been !"
" Aye , I see what you are thinking of , the pianoforte .
But when satisfied on all these points , and their acquaintance proportionably advanced , he contrived to find an opportunity , while their two fathers were engaged with each other , of introducing his mother - in - law , and speaking of her with so much handsome praise , so much warm admiration , so much gratitude for the happiness she secured to his father , and her very kind reception of himself , as was an additional proof of his knowing how to please -- and of his certainly thinking it worth while to try to please her .
The distressing explanation she had to make to Harriet , and all that poor Harriet would be suffering , with the awkwardness of future meetings , the difficulties of continuing or discontinuing the acquaintance , of subduing feelings , concealing resentment , and avoiding eclat , were enough to occupy her in most unmirthful reflections some time longer , and she went to bed at last with nothing settled but the conviction of her having blundered most dreadfully .
" Well , there _is_ feeling here .-- He does seem to have suffered in finding her ill .-- Certainly , I can have no doubt of his being fond of her .
She had been used to affluence : it was gone .
" I see no probability in it , unless you have any better foundation than what you mention .
How could you have consoled her !-- I cannot express my own abhorrence of myself .
" Only think of Elizabeth ' s including everybody !"
To give such intelligence to a person who could not be interested in it , even if it were true , is not what I should expect Colonel Brandon to do ."
Mr Elliot , and his friends in Marlborough Buildings , were talked of the whole evening .
Emma soon recollected , and understood him ; and while she joined in the laugh , it was evident from Jane ' s countenance that she too was really hearing him , though trying to seem deaf .
While they are with us , we shall explore a great deal , I dare say .
" Some very fine morning , he , and Emma , and Harriet , could go very well ; and he could sit still with Mrs . Weston , while the dear girls walked about the gardens .
" Even so .
The next morning brought Elinor a letter by the two - penny post from Lucy herself .
She would not let Jane say , ` No ;' for when Jane first heard of it , ( it was the day before yesterday , the very morning we were at Donwell ,) when Jane first heard of it , she was quite decided against accepting the offer , and for the reasons you mention ; exactly as you say , she had made up her mind to close with nothing till Colonel Campbell ' s return , and nothing should induce her to enter into any engagement at present -- and so she told Mrs . Elton over and over again -- and I am sure I had no more idea that she would change her mind !-- but that good Mrs . Elton , whose judgment never fails her , saw farther than I did .
CHAPTER 43
It was all read , however , steadily , attentively , and without the smallest remark ; and , excepting one momentary glance at her , instantly withdrawn , in the fear of giving pain -- no remembrance of Box Hill seemed to exist .
no -- I am grieved to find -- I was on the point of telling you that when I called at Mrs . Goddard ' s door , which I did the very last thing before I returned to dress , I was told that Miss Smith was not better , by no means better , rather worse .
I have not known you long to be sure , personally at least , but I have known you and all your family by description a great while ; and as soon as I saw you , I felt almost as if you was an old acquaintance .
She had given them neither men , nor names , nor places , that could raise a blush .
Marianne had retreated as much as possible out of sight , to conceal her distress ; and Margaret , understanding some part , but not the whole of the case , thought it incumbent on her to be dignified , and therefore took a seat as far from him as she could , and maintained a strict silence .
" To be sure -- our discordancies must always arise from my being in the wrong ."
" I do not exactly know , for Henrietta and I were at school at the time ; but I believe about a year before he married Mary .
Even this conquest would appear valuable in her eyes .
But indeed , while Elinor remained so well assured within herself of being really beloved by Edward , it required no other consideration of probabilities to make it natural that Lucy should be jealous ; and that she was so , her very confidence was a proof .
He has passed you very often ."
How sure to be mistaken !
" Is Mr . Willoughby much known in your part of Somersetshire ?"
Elinor , nothing can .
Anne will stay ; Anne undertakes to stay at home and take care of him .
" Going so soon !"
You are not just to Harriet ' s claims .
Greatness will not make me so ."
She always takes the right time for applying .
" But she is so fond of the nephew : he is so very great a favourite .
I almost long to attempt her likeness myself .
Miss Hawkins was the youngest of the two daughters of a Bristol -- merchant , of course , he must be called ; but , as the whole of the profits of his mercantile life appeared so very moderate , it was not unfair to guess the dignity of his line of trade had been very moderate also .
" That Mr . Elton should really be in love with me ,-- me , of all people , who did not know him , to speak to him , at Michaelmas !
May was better for every thing than February .
She touched -- she admitted -- she acknowledged the whole truth .
" Ah !
Mr . Knightley was thoughtful again .
She had ventured once alone to Randalls , but it was not pleasant ; and a Harriet Smith , therefore , one whom she could summon at any time to a walk , would be a valuable addition to her privileges .
Emma looked at her , quite unable to speak .
She was vexed .
" And I have not forgotten ," said Emma , " how sure you were that he might have come sooner if he would .
She read nothing but what they had been used to read together .
can this be possible !"
And here , instead of its being a matter of condolence , it turns out to be one of congratulation .-- I congratulate you , Mr . Weston , with all my heart , on the prospect of having one of the most lovely and accomplished young women in England for your daughter ."
then , said I , I must run across , I am sure Miss Woodhouse will allow me just to run across and entreat her to come in ; my mother will be so very happy to see her -- and now we are such a nice party , she cannot refuse .--` Aye , pray do ,' said Mr . Frank Churchill , ` Miss Woodhouse ' s opinion of the instrument will be worth having .'
While Sir Walter and Elizabeth were assiduously pushing their good fortune in Laura Place , Anne was renewing an acquaintance of a very different description .
If a rich admiral were to come in our way , Sir Walter --"
Emma was directly sure that he knew how to make himself agreeable ; the conviction was strengthened by what followed .
A few awkward moments passed , and he sat down again ; and in a more determined manner said ,
One of five thousand Mr Smiths whose names are to be met with everywhere .
He has a great regard for the Bateses , you know , independent of Jane Fairfax -- and is always glad to shew them attention .
But he did not ask for hope or encouragement .
said she , when dinner was over and they had drawn round the fire ; " are you still to be a great orator in spite of yourself ?"
A very restless and feverish night , however , disappointed the expectation of both ; and when Marianne , after persisting in rising , confessed herself unable to sit up , and returned voluntarily to her bed , Elinor was very ready to adopt Mrs . Jennings ' s advice , of sending for the Palmers ' apothecary .
A pleasant " thank you " seemed meant to laugh it off , but a blush , a quivering lip , a tear in the eye , shewed that it was felt beyond a laugh .
My dear Emma , suppose we all have a little gruel ."
I do not know .
Ah !
Charles agreed , but declared his resolution of not going away .
But it will not do .
After the hints you gave just now , which did but confirm my own observations , the last time I was in company with him , I need not affect to have no comprehension of what is going on .
The pain of being obliged to practise concealment towards him , was very little inferior to the pain of having made Harriet unhappy .
Whatever Lucy might think about it herself , you know , it was no business of other people to set it down for certain ."
" Is it very ugly ?"
I want a change .
" The Colonel is a ninny , my dear ; because he has two thousand a - year himself , he thinks that nobody else can marry on less .
I had not considered that my excessive intimacy must have its danger of ill consequence in many ways ; and that I had no right to be trying whether I could attach myself to either of the girls , at the risk of raising even an unpleasant report , were there no other ill effects .
I cannot doubt it .
He professed himself extremely anxious about her fair friend -- her fair , lovely , amiable friend .
" No , indeed , not us .
Exactly so indeed !"
Edward heard with pleasure of Colonel Brandon ' s being expected at the Cottage , as he really wished not only to be better acquainted with him , but to have an opportunity of convincing him that he no longer resented his giving him the living of Delaford --" Which , at present ," said he , " after thanks so ungraciously delivered as mine were on the occasion , he must think I have never forgiven him for offering ."
When at last she returned to the unconscious Marianne , she found her just awaking , refreshed by so long and sweet a sleep to the extent of her hopes .
I wonder where that boat was built !"
" Oh !
" Oh !"
This was very kind of you to be persuaded to come .
I could suppose she might in time -- but can she already ?-- Did not you misunderstand him ?-- You were both talking of other things ; of business , shows of cattle , or new drills -- and might not you , in the confusion of so many subjects , mistake him ?-- It was not Harriet ' s hand that he was certain of -- it was the dimensions of some famous ox ."
" So extremely like Maple Grove !
Ma ' am ," addressing her , " do you hear what Miss Woodhouse is so obliging to say about Jane ' s handwriting ?"
A Miss Hawkins -- that ' s all I know .
Once , too , he spoke to her .
" But Mr . Knightley does not want to marry .
Elizabeth was , for a short time , suffering a good deal .
" Aye , we men are sad fellows .
" You , sir , may say any thing ," cried Mr . Elton , " but I must confess that I regard it as a most happy thought , the placing of Miss Smith out of doors ; and the tree is touched with such inimitable spirit !
no .
This could not be pardoned .
She was sitting by Edward , and in taking his tea from Mrs . Dashwood , his hand passed so directly before her , as to make a ring , with a plait of hair in the centre , very conspicuous on one of his fingers .
said she , with a conscious look .
Marianne got up the next morning at her usual time ; to every inquiry replied that she was better , and tried to prove herself so , by engaging in her accustomary employments .
It was hot ; and after walking some time over the gardens in a scattered , dispersed way , scarcely any three together , they insensibly followed one another to the delicious shade of a broad short avenue of limes , which stretching beyond the garden at an equal distance from the river , seemed the finish of the pleasure grounds .-- It led to nothing ; nothing but a view at the end over a low stone wall with high pillars , which seemed intended , in their erection , to give the appearance of an approach to the house , which never had been there .
" Indeed I will .
I hope you think Louisa perfectly recovered now ?"
For it is not five minutes since I received Mrs . Cole ' s note -- no , it cannot be more than five -- or at least ten -- for I had got my bonnet and spencer on , just ready to come out -- I was only gone down to speak to Patty again about the pork -- Jane was standing in the passage -- were not you , Jane ?-- for my mother was so afraid that we had not any salting - pan large enough .
The half hour was chatted away pleasantly enough ; and she was not at all surprised at the end of it , to have their walking party joined by both the Miss Musgroves , at Mary ' s particular invitation .
Your musical knowledge alone would entitle you to name your own terms , have as many rooms as you like , and mix in the family as much as you chose ;-- that is -- I do not know -- if you knew the harp , you might do all that , I am very sure ; but you sing as well as play ;-- yes , I really believe you might , even without the harp , stipulate for what you chose ;-- and you must and shall be delightfully , honourably and comfortably settled before the Campbells or I have any rest ."
with the help of spectacles .
He was afraid poor Isabella would not like it .
The repose of the latter became more and more disturbed ; and her sister , who watched , with unremitting attention her continual change of posture , and heard the frequent but inarticulate sounds of complaint which passed her lips , was almost wishing to rouse her from so painful a slumber , when Marianne , suddenly awakened by some accidental noise in the house , started hastily up , and , with feverish wildness , cried out ,--
" I never had any conjectures about it ," replied Margaret ; " it was you who told me of it yourself ."
said Emma .
Emma laughed , and replied : " But I had the assistance of all your endeavours to counteract the indulgence of other people .
" I was only going to observe , that though such unfortunate circumstances do sometimes occur both to men and women , I cannot imagine them to be very frequent .
her father and mother !"
But she could hear of no situation that at once answered her notions of comfort and ease , and suited the prudence of her eldest daughter , whose steadier judgment rejected several houses as too large for their income , which her mother would have approved .
Mrs Wallis has an amusing idea , as nurse tells me , that it is to be put into the marriage articles when you and Mr Elliot marry , that your father is not to marry Mrs Clay .
He had said that Jane Fairfax received attentions from Mrs . Elton which nobody else paid her .
-- Mr . Elton was appealed to .--" Was not it astonishingly like ?-- She could really almost fancy herself at Maple Grove ."
I cannot recollect .-- It is very odd , but I cannot recollect .-- Mr .
He fancied bathing might be good for it -- the warm bath -- but she says it did him no lasting benefit .
Every minute is valuable .
In a moment she perceived that the others were likewise aware of the mistake .
I have been seeing their intimacy with the greatest pleasure .
" The joke ," he replied gravely , " seemed confined to you and Mr .
which instantly burst forth , had all the evidence of corresponding perturbation .
" We can finish this some other time , you know .
I do not want to say more than is necessary -- I am too much ashamed of having given way as I have done , and I dare say you understand me ."
But by coolly giving the reins a better direction herself they happily passed the danger ; and by once afterwards judiciously putting out her hand they neither fell into a rut , nor ran foul of a dung - cart ; and Anne , with some amusement at their style of driving , which she imagined no bad representation of the general guidance of their affairs , found herself safely deposited by them at the Cottage .
Who could it be ?
For HIM she felt much compassion ;-- for Lucy very little -- and it cost her some pains to procure that little ;-- for the rest of the party none at all .
Mrs . Palmer had her child , and Mrs . Jennings her carpet - work ; they talked of the friends they had left behind , arranged Lady Middleton ' s engagements , and wondered whether Mr . Palmer and Colonel Brandon would get farther than Reading that night .
" Yes , she would be , but that she thinks there will be another put - off .
A gentleman ' s family is all that I should condition for ."
We invalids think we are privileged people ."
They all seemed to remember the day , the hour , the party , the occasion -- to feel the same consciousness , the same regrets -- to be ready to return to the same good understanding ; and they were just growing again like themselves , ( Harriet , as Emma must suspect , as ready as the best of them to be cordial and happy ,) when the carriage reappeared , and all was over .
She is reserved , more reserved , I think , than she used to be -- And I love an open temper .
Actually to discover that Mr . Knightley is a gentleman !
Who can be in doubt of what followed ?
She could not , however , reach such a degree of certainty , as not to be anxious to hear whether anything had been said on the subject at the other house , where the Crofts had previously been calling .
She was calm , except when she thought of her mother ; but she was almost hopeless ; and in this state she continued till noon , scarcely stirring from her sister ' s bed , her thoughts wandering from one image of grief , one suffering friend to another , and her spirits oppressed to the utmost by the conversation of Mrs . Jennings , who scrupled not to attribute the severity and danger of this attack to the many weeks of previous indisposition which Marianne ' s disappointment had brought on .
no -- I never conceived you could become indifferent .
" Excuse me ," said Jane earnestly , " I cannot by any means consent to such an arrangement , so needlessly troublesome to your servant .
He thought principally of Mrs . Churchill ' s illness , and wanted to know how she was treated ; and as for the ball , it was shocking to have dear Emma disappointed ; but they would all be safer at home .
" Poor Marianne !"
Respect would be added to affection .
It so happened that while her two sisters with Mrs . Jennings were first calling on her in Harley Street , another of her acquaintance had dropt in -- a circumstance in itself not apparently likely to produce evil to her .
Elinor , this eldest daughter , whose advice was so effectual , possessed a strength of understanding , and coolness of judgment , which qualified her , though only nineteen , to be the counsellor of her mother , and enabled her frequently to counteract , to the advantage of them all , that eagerness of mind in Mrs . Dashwood which must generally have led to imprudence .
Knightley .-- It seemed as if there were an instantaneous impression in her favour , as if his eyes received the truth from her ' s , and all that had passed of good in her feelings were at once caught and honoured .-- He looked at her with a glow of regard .
" Very well ; and if he had intended to give her one , he would have told her so ."
It was a good scheme ; but on driving to the door they heard that neither " master nor mistress was at home ;" they had both been out some time ; the man believed they were gone to Hartfield .
Emma was quite eager to see this superior treasure .
No wonder !
I should not wonder if it were to bring on the declaration .
Mind me , now , if they an ' t married by Mid - summer .
His manners , however , must have been unmarked , wavering , dubious , or she could not have been so misled .
Shortly afterwards Miss Bates , passing near the window , descried Mr . Knightley on horse - back not far off .
For such particulars , stated on such authority , Elinor could not withhold her credit ; nor was she disposed to it , for the circumstance was in perfect unison with what she had heard and seen herself .
said Charles Musgrove , and " No , no !"
Willoughby thought the same ; and their behaviour at all times , was an illustration of their opinions .
This was too loud a call for a compliment to be passed by , and Mr . Weston , with a very good grace , immediately exclaimed ,
But though Mrs . Ferrars DID come to see them , and always treated them with the make - believe of decent affection , they were never insulted by her real favour and preference .
It rained dreadfully hard for half an hour while we were at breakfast .
They were the first entitled , after Mrs . Weston and Emma , to be made happy ;-- from them he would have proceeded to Miss Fairfax , but she was so deep in conversation with John Knightley , that it would have been too positive an interruption ; and finding himself close to Mrs . Elton , and her attention disengaged , he necessarily began on the subject with her .
" His character , however ," answered Elinor , " does not rest on ONE act of kindness , to which his affection for Marianne , were humanity out of the case , would have prompted him .
Peculiarly lucky !-- for as to any real knowledge of a person ' s disposition that Bath , or any public place , can give -- it is all nothing ; there can be no knowledge .
She hoped it was not so .
He had frightened her a little about Mr . Elton ; but when she considered that Mr . Knightley could not have observed him as she had done , neither with the interest , nor ( she must be allowed to tell herself , in spite of Mr . Knightley ' s pretensions ) with the skill of such an observer on such a question as herself , that he had spoken it hastily and in anger , she was able to believe , that he had rather said what he wished resentfully to be true , than what he knew any thing about .
" It is not that such a circumstance would now make me unhappy , but I cannot believe it .
Between ourselves , I think it a great pity Henrietta did not remain at Lyme as long as Louisa ; it would have kept her a little out of his way .
Oh !
But , however , I hope you will think better of it .
Her father was growing nervous , and could not understand _her_ .
" Do not be alarmed ," said Miss Dashwood , " nothing of the kind will be done ; for my mother will never have money enough to attempt it ."
No other visitor appeared that evening , and the ladies were unanimous in agreeing to go early to bed .
Marianne was in every respect materially better , and he declared her entirely out of danger .
" What !
" I should be extremely happy ; I hope you cannot doubt my willingness to be of even the slightest use to you ," replied Anne ; " but I suspect that you are considering me as having a higher claim on Mr Elliot , a greater right to influence him , than is really the case .
A few minutes , though as few as possible , were inevitably consumed ; and when her own mistress again , when able to turn and look as she had done before , she found herself accosted by Captain Wentworth , in a reserved yet hurried sort of farewell .
and once Henry asked me for a knife , but I told him knives were only made for grandpapas .
Her kindness is not sympathy ; her good - nature is not tenderness .
Poor Elinor !-- here was a new scheme for getting her to Delaford !-- but her spirit was stubborn .
That was all prior to my coming to Bath .
Elton ?-- That will be a favour indeed !
Well !
Miss Lucy Steele is , I dare say , a very deserving young woman , but in the present case you know , the connection must be impossible .
Heir to Sir Walter Elliot !
She expressed herself most willing , ready , happy to remain .
Such , she believed , were his words ; but scarcely had she received their sound , than her attention was caught by other sounds immediately behind her , which rendered every thing else trivial .
Mrs . Weston kissed her with tears of joy ; and when she could find utterance , assured her , that this protestation had done her more good than any thing else in the world could do .
The idea of wanting gratitude and consideration for Miss Woodhouse , whom she really loved extremely , made her wretched for a while , and when the violence of grief was comforted away , still remained powerful enough to prompt to what was right and support her in it very tolerably .
The whole party were but just reassembled in the drawing - room when Mr . Weston made his appearance among them .
There was no want of likeness , she had been fortunate in the attitude , and as she meant to throw in a little improvement to the figure , to give a little more height , and considerably more elegance , she had great confidence of its being in every way a pretty drawing at last , and of its filling its destined place with credit to them both -- a standing memorial of the beauty of one , the skill of the other , and the friendship of both ; with as many other agreeable associations as Mr . Elton ' s very promising attachment was likely to add .
" Here ," resumed Harriet , turning to her box again , " here is something still more valuable , I mean that _has_ _been_ more valuable , because this is what did really once belong to him , which the court - plaister never did ."
Emma saw symptoms of it immediately in the expression of her face ; and while paying her own compliments to Mrs . Bates , and appearing to attend to the good old lady ' s replies , she saw her with a sort of anxious parade of mystery fold up a letter which she had apparently been reading aloud to Miss Fairfax , and return it into the purple and gold reticule by her side , saying , with significant nods ,
You are a great deal too necessary at Hartfield to be spared to Abbey - Mill ."
She had been the only one of the set absent , for Sir Walter and Elizabeth had not only been quite at her ladyship ' s service themselves , but had actually been happy to be employed by her in collecting others , and had been at the trouble of inviting both Lady Russell and Mr Elliot ; and Mr Elliot had made a point of leaving Colonel Wallis early , and Lady Russell had fresh arranged all her evening engagements in order to wait on her .
She is a good - hearted girl as ever lived .-- Very well upon my word .
" Better than she ever used to do ?-- You see how my father and Mrs . Weston doat upon her ."
" If I know myself , Harriet , mine is an active , busy mind , with a great many independent resources ; and I do not perceive why I should be more in want of employment at forty or fifty than one - and - twenty .
I cannot help suspecting him .
" But still , you will be an old maid !
Such a scoundrel of a fellow !
Here were funds of enjoyment .
" A great coxcomb !"
I have not the smallest doubt of the issue .
[ Emma by Jane Austen 1816 ]
cried Mr . Weston , " about Perry and a carriage ?
In the warmth of true contrition , she would call upon her the very next morning , and it should be the beginning , on her side , of a regular , equal , kindly intercourse .
We know , on the contrary , that he has so much of both , that he is glad to get rid of them at the idlest haunts in the kingdom .
CHAPTER 2
Edward started --" Reserved !
I have the honour of being acquainted with a neighbour of yours , ( turning to Emma ,) a lady residing in or near Highbury ; a family of the name of Fairfax .
" Family connexions were always worth preserving , good company always worth seeking ; Lady Dalrymple had taken a house , for three months , in Laura Place , and would be living in style .
Miss Woodhouse , why are you always so right ?"
Excellent fellow .
You would not think it to look at him , but he is bilious -- Mr . Cole is very bilious .
In one circumstance only , my Marianne , may your destiny be different from her ' s !"
have you heard the news ?"
" Yes ; it is in two points offensive to me ; I have two strong grounds of objection to it .
Anne was the nearest to him , and making yet a little advance , she instantly spoke .
There was one point which Anne , on returning to her family , would have been more thankful to ascertain even than Mr Elliot ' s being in love with Elizabeth , which was , her father ' s not being in love with Mrs Clay ; and she was very far from easy about it , when she had been at home a few hours .
Elinor could not deny the truth of this , and she tried to find in it a motive sufficient for their silence .
He was more obviously struck and confused by the sight of her than she had ever observed before ; he looked quite red .
" Come ," said she , " I will tell you something , in return for what you have told me .
" Marianne is not well ," said she .
Dixon ?"
She was sorry , very sorry .
I have been expecting to hear from you , and still more to see you , every hour of the day .
cried Emma .
He began -- stopping , however , almost directly to say , " Had I been offered the sight of one of this gentleman ' s letters to his mother - in - law a few months ago , Emma , it would not have been taken with such indifference ."
Part of her meaning was to conceal some favourite thoughts of her own and Mr . Weston ' s on the subject , as much as possible .
The Palmers were to remove to Cleveland about the end of March , for the Easter holidays ; and Mrs . Jennings , with both her friends , received a very warm invitation from Charlotte to go with them .
" Very much to the honour of both ," was the handsome reply .
Willoughby , what is the meaning of this ?
You want nothing but patience -- or give it a more fascinating name , call it hope .
Their estate was large , and their residence was at Norland Park , in the centre of their property , where , for many generations , they had lived in so respectable a manner as to engage the general good opinion of their surrounding acquaintance .
" That is an expression , Sir John ," said Marianne , warmly , " which I particularly dislike .
Anne listened , but without quite understanding it .
Whether it was his own idea you know , one cannot tell .
Yes , next week .
It is a sort of prologue to the play , a motto to the chapter ; and will be soon followed by matter - of - fact prose ."
at least , that I should ever bore people half so much about all the Knightleys together , as she does about Jane Fairfax .
One man ' s ways may be as good as another ' s , but we all like our own best .
He said , from the first , it was a very good sort -- which was our great comfort ; but the measles are a dreadful complaint .
It is Mr Elliot himself ."
Knightley ' s words dwelt with her .
Hitherto I fancy you and I are the only people to whom his looks and manners have explained themselves ."
On one other question which perhaps her utmost wisdom might not have prevented , she was soon spared all suspense ; for , after the Miss Musgroves had returned and finished their visit at the Cottage she had this spontaneous information from Mary : --
Willoughby , where was your heart when you wrote those words ?
She had not been able to speak ; and , on entering the carriage , sunk back for a moment overcome -- then reproaching herself for having taken no leave , making no acknowledgment , parting in apparent sullenness , she looked out with voice and hand eager to shew a difference ; but it was just too late .
She joined Charles and Mary , and was tired enough to be very glad of Charles ' s other arm ; but Charles , though in very good humour with her , was out of temper with his wife .
They seem to satisfy every body else ."
" Mrs . Palmer appeared quite well , and I am commissioned to tell you , that you will certainly see her to - morrow ."
Louisa ' s voice was the first distinguished .
I have been acquainted with you by character many years .
I never was more astonished in my life ."
" Yes .
To Mr . John Knightley was she indebted for her first idea on the subject , for the first start of its possibility .
Elinor was alternately diverted and pained ; but Marianne persevered , and saw every night in the brightness of the fire , and every morning in the appearance of the atmosphere , the certain symptoms of approaching frost .
If there had not been so much anger , there would have been desperate awkwardness ; but their straightforward emotions left no room for the little zigzags of embarrassment .
Perhaps it will be wisest in you to check your feelings while you can : at any rate do not let them carry you far , unless you are persuaded of his liking you .
Her fears , he had no courage , no confidence to attempt the removal of :-- he listened to them in silent despondence ;-- but her difficulties were instantly obviated , for with a readiness that seemed to speak the occasion , and the service pre - arranged in his mind , he offered himself as the messenger who should fetch Mrs . Dashwood .
and she had difficulty in behaving with temper .
His goodness of heart and simplicity of character were irresistible .
" We can mean no other ," cried Lucy , smiling .
" Mr . Elton ' s manners are not perfect ," replied Emma ; " but where there is a wish to please , one ought to overlook , and one does overlook a great deal .
The speech was more to Emma than to Harriet , which Emma could understand .
But the compassionate feelings of a friend of her father gave a change to her destiny .
I wish Sarah was here to doctor you , but I am no doctor myself .
The Coles were very respectable in their way , but they ought to be taught that it was not for them to arrange the terms on which the superior families would visit them .
Dr . Hughes I declare -- and Mrs . Hughes .
No , indeed , Miss Woodhouse , you need not be afraid ; I can sit and admire him now without any great misery .
Elinor thought it wisest to touch that point no more .
" Why should you caution me ?-- You do not think I care about Mr . Frank Churchill ."
And yet she was a happy woman , and a woman whom no one named without good - will .
The cold repast was over , and the party were to go out once more to see what had not yet been seen , the old Abbey fish - ponds ; perhaps get as far as the clover , which was to be begun cutting on the morrow , or , at any rate , have the pleasure of being hot , and growing cool again .-- Mr .
She did : he was satisfied , and said no more .
Anne said what was proper , and enquired after her husband .
yes , quite well ; and so full of your praises , he did nothing but say fine things of you ."
She must not appear at first .
But to be sure , in general they are so spoilt !
Jane was quite longing to go to Ireland , from his account of things ."
We will go to Hartfield afterwards .
However this morning he came just as we came home from church ; and then it all came out , how he had been sent for Wednesday to Harley Street , and been talked to by his mother and all of them , and how he had declared before them all that he loved nobody but Lucy , and nobody but Lucy would he have .
cried Elinor , " could it be -- could Willoughby !"
And I believe Marianne will be the most happy with him of the two ."
" I always told you she was -- a little ; but you will soon overcome all that part of her reserve which ought to be overcome , all that has its foundation in diffidence .
" But what does Lady Russell think of this acquaintance ?"
said she , seating herself between Elinor and Marianne , " for it is so bad a day I was afraid you might not come , which would be a shocking thing , as we go away again tomorrow .
You know your own concerns best .
" She will be more hurt by it , for Robert always was her favourite .-- She will be more hurt by it , and on the same principle will forgive him much sooner ."
I dare say my daughter will be here presently , Miss Woodhouse .
Another pause .
Mr . Frank Churchill , I must tell you my mother ' s spectacles have never been in fault since ; the rivet never came out again .
no , indeed ."
She went , however ; and when they reached the farm , and she was to be put down , at the end of the broad , neat gravel walk , which led between espalier apple - trees to the front door , the sight of every thing which had given her so much pleasure the autumn before , was beginning to revive a little local agitation ; and when they parted , Emma observed her to be looking around with a sort of fearful curiosity , which determined her not to allow the visit to exceed the proposed quarter of an hour .
Emma smiled , and felt that Mr . Weston had very good reason for saying so .
He did not believe it to proceed from any thing that care and medicine might not remove , or at least that she might not have many years of existence before her ; but he could not be prevailed on , by all his father ' s doubts , to say that her complaints were merely imaginary , or that she was as strong as ever .
" Here comes this dear old beau of mine , I protest !-- Only think of his gallantry in coming away before the other men !-- what a dear creature he is ;-- I assure you I like him excessively .
Elinor tenderly invited her to be open .
Allow me to congratulate you on having so respectable and well - judging a friend , and to join in his wish that the living -- it is about two hundred a - year -- were much more considerable , and such as might better enable you to -- as might be more than a temporary accommodation to yourself -- such , in short , as might establish all your views of happiness ."
And last night he was with us so happy , so cheerful , so affectionate ?
" That is to say , you chose to have your walk , for you were not six yards from your own door when I had the pleasure of meeting you ; and Henry and John had seen more drops than they could count long before .
Never had the exquisite sight , smell , sensation of nature , tranquil , warm , and brilliant after a storm , been more attractive to her .
She can never be more lost to you than she is now ."
They have not seen two such drawing rooms before .
This was agreed upon between the two friends as the only thing to be done ; and Colonel Wallis was to assist in every way that he could .
Sir Walter had at first thought more of London ; but Mr Shepherd felt that he could not be trusted in London , and had been skilful enough to dissuade him from it , and make Bath preferred .
She could think of nothing better : and though there was something in it which her own heart could not approve -- something of ingratitude , merely glossed over -- it must be done , or what would become of Harriet ?
He left me not half an hour ago ."
A house was never taken good care of , Mr Shepherd observed , without a lady : he did not know , whether furniture might not be in danger of suffering as much where there was no lady , as where there were many children .
After a short pause , Mr Shepherd presumed to say --
A boyish scheme , indeed !-- I cannot comprehend a man ' s wishing to give a woman any proof of affection which he knows she would rather dispense with ; and he did know that she would have prevented the instrument ' s coming if she could ."
no , the meeting is certainly to - day ," was the abrupt answer , which denoted the impossibility of any blunder on Mrs . Elton ' s side .-- " I do believe ," she continued , " this is the most troublesome parish that ever was .
Every body in and about Highbury who had ever visited Mr . Elton , was disposed to pay him attention on his marriage .
She must have been a perpetual enemy .
Manners were all that could be safely judged of , under a much longer knowledge than they had yet had of Mr . Churchill .
" Mrs . Gilbert does not mean to dance , but there is a young lady disengaged whom I should be very glad to see dancing -- Miss Smith ."
Oh !
The visit passed off altogether in high good humour .
Whatever money he might come into when his father died , whatever his share of the family property , it is , I dare say , all afloat , all employed in his stock , and so forth ; and though , with diligence and good luck , he may be rich in time , it is next to impossible that he should have realised any thing yet ."
Mr . Elton ' s superiority had very ample acknowledgment .
" Oh !
A note was just then brought in , and laid on the table ,
I used to think she had some taste in dress , but I was ashamed of her at the concert .
Oh !
" But she is so amusing , so extremely amusing !
But it was neither in Elinor ' s power , nor in her wish , to rouse such feelings in another , by her retailed explanation , as had at first been called forth in herself .
It would have surprised Anne if Louisa could have readily answered such a speech : words of such interest , spoken with such serious warmth !
The introduction must be unpleasant , whenever it takes place ; and the sooner it could be over , the better ."
asked Mrs .
" Yes , ma ' am -- but not to bide long .
We explored to King ' s - Weston twice last summer , in that way , most delightfully , just after their first having the barouche - landau .
That nature had given it in feature could not be unseen by the young woman , nor could her higher powers of mind be unfelt by the parents .
Worse than all !
She had a strong impression of his having said , in a vext tone of voice , after Captain Wentworth ' s interference , " You ought to have minded me , Walter ; I told you not to teaze your aunt ;" and could comprehend his regretting that Captain Wentworth should do what he ought to have done himself .
" Another time , Sir , I thank you , not now ."
He was received by Mrs . Dashwood with more than politeness ; with a kindness which Sir John ' s account of him and her own gratitude prompted ; and every thing that passed during the visit tended to assure him of the sense , elegance , mutual affection , and domestic comfort of the family to whom accident had now introduced him .
This seems to have been a day of general elucidation , for this very morning first unfolded it to us .
no friends ?
He thought it a very degrading alliance ; and Lady Russell , though with more tempered and pardonable pride , received it as a most unfortunate one .
What feelings have they , the season , the air altogether inspired !
" Not at all , sir .
" But I have never fixed on June or any other month -- merely looked forward to the summer in general ."
" Is there no one to help me ?"
" I must see somebody very superior to any one I have seen yet , to be tempted ; Mr . Elton , you know , ( recollecting herself ,) is out of the question : and I do _not_ wish to see any such person .
" What !
As it was , it required but a slight effort of fancy to connect his emotion with the tender recollection of past regard .
" Yes , you were very cross ; and I do not know what about , except that you were too late for the best strawberries .
you were perfectly right !
" Do you know that you are quite rude ?"
The smile was returned as Jane answered ,
When they were got a little farther , Anne ventured to press again for what he had to communicate .
" I understand you ," said Elinor .
She came solitarily down the gravel walk -- a Miss Martin just appearing at the door , and parting with her seemingly with ceremonious civility .
As he became rational , he ought to have roused himself and shaken off all that was unworthy in their authority .
You shan ' t talk me out of my satisfaction .
Whenever she is with us , Mrs . Cole does not know how to shew her kindness enough ; and I must say that Jane deserves it as much as any body can .
I had an acrostic once sent to me upon my own name , which I was not at all pleased with .
succeeded in the true English style , burying under a calmness that seemed all but indifference , the real attachment which would have led either of them , if requisite , to do every thing for the good of the other .
" No ," said Emma , laughing ; " but perhaps there might be some made to his coming back again .
" And are they going farther westward ?"
I promised my wife to leave it all to her .
" Henry is a fine boy , but John is very like his mama .
After securing accommodations , and ordering a dinner at one of the inns , the next thing to be done was unquestionably to walk directly down to the sea .
However , I do really think Mr . Martin a very amiable young man , and have a great opinion of him ; and his being so much attached to me -- and his writing such a letter -- but as to leaving you , it is what I would not do upon any consideration ."
" How is Mary ?"
" I must spend some time with them ; I am sure they will want it ;-- afterwards I may probably be glad to dispose of myself .
I like them extremely .
Now there ' s Mr . Rose at Exeter , a prodigious smart young man , quite a beau , clerk to Mr . Simpson , you know , and yet if you do but meet him of a morning , he is not fit to be seen .-- I suppose your brother was quite a beau , Miss Dashwood , before he married , as he was so rich ?"
And drawing him a little aside , she whispered her persuasion that Lucy could not stay much longer .
Tell me , Willoughby ; for heaven ' s sake tell me , what is the matter ?"
Anne did not shrink from it ; on the contrary , she truly felt as she said , in observing --
" Add to which ," cried Marianne , " that he has neither genius , taste , nor spirit .
But how sad it is that he should not live at home with his father !
" Mr . Willoughby , I advise you at present to return to Combe -- I am not at leisure to remain with you longer .-- Whatever your business may be with me , will it be better recollected and explained to - morrow ."
He told Patty this , but bid her not mind it , and be sure not to say any thing to us about it , for Mrs . Hodges _would_ be cross sometimes , and as long as so many sacks were sold , it did not signify who ate the remainder .
I shall not lose you so soon , and Edward will have greater opportunity of improving that natural taste for your favourite pursuit which must be so indispensably necessary to your future felicity .
I can hardly keep my hands warm even in my muff .
Here am I come down for only one day , and you are engaged with a dinner - party !-- When did it happen before , or any thing like it ?
" Ah !
" I must take leave to observe , Sir Walter ," said Mr Shepherd one morning at Kellynch Hall , as he laid down the newspaper , " that the present juncture is much in our favour .
As she sat one morning , looking forward to exactly such a close of the present day , a note was brought from Mrs . Goddard , requesting , in most respectful terms , to be allowed to bring Miss Smith with her ; a most welcome request : for Miss Smith was a girl of seventeen , whom Emma knew very well by sight , and had long felt an interest in , on account of her beauty .
But even this encouragement failed , for he would go ; and Lucy , who would have outstaid him , had his visit lasted two hours , soon afterwards went away .
But this is the usual way of heightening alarm , where there is nothing to be alarmed at in reality ."
" Wentworth was the very name !
One good thing was immediately brought to a certainty by this removal ,-- the ball at the Crown .
He must have a pretty good opinion of himself ."
said she , in a whisper , to Elinor .
" I hope you will bring Elton ," said he : " but I will not trouble you to give any other invitations ."
She was rather low all the evening , but Emma could allow for her amiable regrets , and sometimes relieved them by speaking of her own affection , sometimes by bringing forward the idea of Mr . Elton .
When he did return , he sought out the child and took notice of her .
And if they are , I only beg you to send them home ."
She was not sorry .
And now , let me talk to you of something else .
After a pause of wonder , she exclaimed --
You see I cannot leave Mrs .
I am sure she will be married to Mr . Willoughby very soon ."
The varieties in the fitting - up of the rooms , where the common necessaries provided by the owner , in the common indifferent plight , were contrasted with some few articles of a rare species of wood , excellently worked up , and with something curious and valuable from all the distant countries Captain Harville had visited , were more than amusing to Anne ; connected as it all was with his profession , the fruit of its labours , the effect of its influence on his habits , the picture of repose and domestic happiness it presented , made it to her a something more , or less , than gratification .
This is precisely what I wanted .
He came with a pretence at an apology from their sister - in - law , for not coming too ; " but she was so much engaged with her mother , that really she had no leisure for going any where ."
Every body ' s attention was called , and almost every body was concerned .-- Colonel Brandon rose up and went to them without knowing what he did .-- Mrs .
However , she will not find her grandmama at all deafer than she was two years ago ; which is saying a great deal at my mother ' s time of life -- and it really is full two years , you know , since she was here .
" Ay , if we can do THAT , Ma ' am ," said Elinor , " we shall do very well with or without Colonel Brandon ."
She is a shrewd , intelligent , sensible woman .
Lady Elliot had been an excellent woman , sensible and amiable ; whose judgement and conduct , if they might be pardoned the youthful infatuation which made her Lady Elliot , had never required indulgence afterwards .-- She had humoured , or softened , or concealed his failings , and promoted his real respectability for seventeen years ; and though not the very happiest being in the world herself , had found enough in her duties , her friends , and her children , to attach her to life , and make it no matter of indifference to her when she was called on to quit them .
Jemima is so careful ; and she could send us word every hour how he was .
I hope it is not to say that your sister is worse ."
How is Mr .
Like him , she had tried the scheme and rejected it ; but such an alternative as this had not occurred to her .
" Though with your usual anxiety for our happiness ," said Elinor , " you have been obviating every impediment to the present scheme which occurred to you , there is still one objection which , in my opinion , cannot be so easily removed ."
I can hardly write .
Marianne remained perfectly silent , though her countenance betrayed her interest in what was said .
I have something of consequence to inform you of , which I was on the point of communicating by paper .
You may guess how readily he came into my wishes ; and having his approbation , I made my way directly to Miss Bates , to assure her that the carriage would be at her service before it took us home ; for I thought it would be making her comfortable at once .
It determined him to leave Lyme , and await her complete recovery elsewhere .
On their first coming into the country , they had lived in proportion to their income , quietly , keeping little company , and that little unexpensively ; but the last year or two had brought them a considerable increase of means -- the house in town had yielded greater profits , and fortune in general had smiled on them .
And , besides , I must give you a hint , Frank ; any want of attention to her _here_ should be carefully avoided .
As Mr Shepherd perceived that this connexion of the Crofts did them no service with Sir Walter , he mentioned it no more ; returning , with all his zeal , to dwell on the circumstances more indisputably in their favour ; their age , and number , and fortune ; the high idea they had formed of Kellynch Hall , and extreme solicitude for the advantage of renting it ; making it appear as if they ranked nothing beyond the happiness of being the tenants of Sir Walter Elliot : an extraordinary taste , certainly , could they have been supposed in the secret of Sir Walter ' s estimate of the dues of a tenant .
He wishes exceedingly to come ; but his uncle and aunt will not spare him ."
Her looks and words had nothing to restrain them .
" He comes from Mr . Pratt ' s purposely to see us .
She had no difficulty in procuring Isabella ' s invitation ; and she was fortunate in having a sufficient reason for asking it , without resorting to invention .-- There was a tooth amiss .
" No , THAT he is not .
I found he had been used to hear of me .
" And a very good living it was ," Charles added : " only five - and - twenty miles from Uppercross , and in a very fine country : fine part of Dorsetshire .
Oh , barbarously insolent !-- Elinor , can he be justified ?"
Every thing was silent ; this could not be borne many seconds ; she opened the door , advanced a few steps towards the stairs , and after listening half a minute , returned into the room in all the agitation which a conviction of having heard him would naturally produce ; in the ecstasy of her feelings at that instant she could not help exclaiming , " Oh , Elinor , it is Willoughby , indeed it is !"
Ambition , as well as love , had probably been mortified .
My idea of the simple and the natural will be to have the table spread in the dining - room .
" You may well class the delight , the honour , and the comfort of such a situation together ," said Jane , " they are pretty sure to be equal ; however , I am very serious in not wishing any thing to be attempted at present for me .
She was born to overcome an affection formed so late in life as at seventeen , and with no sentiment superior to strong esteem and lively friendship , voluntarily to give her hand to another !-- and THAT other , a man who had suffered no less than herself under the event of a former attachment , whom , two years before , she had considered too old to be married ,-- and who still sought the constitutional safeguard of a flannel waistcoat !
They will soon be in Yorkshire .
Elliot ."
Mrs . Elton left them no choice .
Mr Shepherd was all gratitude .
By the report which he hastened over to Kellynch to make , Admiral Croft was a native of Somersetshire , who having acquired a very handsome fortune , was wishing to settle in his own country , and had come down to Taunton in order to look at some advertised places in that immediate neighbourhood , which , however , had not suited him ; that accidentally hearing --( it was just as he had foretold , Mr Shepherd observed , Sir Walter ' s concerns could not be kept a secret ,)-- accidentally hearing of the possibility of Kellynch Hall being to let , and understanding his ( Mr Shepherd ' s ) connection with the owner , he had introduced himself to him in order to make particular inquiries , and had , in the course of a pretty long conference , expressed as strong an inclination for the place as a man who knew it only by description could feel ; and given Mr Shepherd , in his explicit account of himself , every proof of his being a most responsible , eligible tenant .
Has he been acting a part in his behaviour to your sister all this time ?
His name , he replied , was Willoughby , and his present home was at Allenham , from whence he hoped she would allow him the honour of calling tomorrow to enquire after Miss Dashwood .
You cannot really , seriously , doubt it .
" I think every one MUST admire it ," replied Elinor , " who ever saw the place ; though it is not to be supposed that any one can estimate its beauties as we do ."
It was better to pay my visit , then "--
Emma had not to listen to such paradings again -- to any so exclusively addressed to herself -- so disgustingly decorated with a " dear Miss Woodhouse ."
Are the Middletons pleasant people ?"
I can think of but one thing -- Who is in love with her ?
-- Then having recourse to her workbasket , in excuse for leaning down her face , and concealing all the exquisite feelings of delight and entertainment which she knew she must be expressing , she added , " Well , now tell me every thing ; make this intelligible to me .
Therefore , Sir Walter , what I would take leave to suggest is , that if in consequence of any rumours getting abroad of your intention ; which must be contemplated as a possible thing , because we know how difficult it is to keep the actions and designs of one part of the world from the notice and curiosity of the other ; consequence has its tax ; I , John Shepherd , might conceal any family - matters that I chose , for nobody would think it worth their while to observe me ; but Sir Walter Elliot has eyes upon him which it may be very difficult to elude ; and therefore , thus much I venture upon , that it will not greatly surprise me if , with all our caution , some rumour of the truth should get abroad ; in the supposition of which , as I was going to observe , since applications will unquestionably follow , I should think any from our wealthy naval commanders particularly worth attending to ; and beg leave to add , that two hours will bring me over at any time , to save you the trouble of replying ."
" Colonel Brandon !"
Her own spirits improved by change of place and subject , by being removed three miles from Kellynch ; Mary ' s ailments lessened by having a constant companion , and their daily intercourse with the other family , since there was neither superior affection , confidence , nor employment in the cottage , to be interrupted by it , was rather an advantage .
But she does not do him justice , nor think enough about Winthrop .
said he , offering his hand .
" What two letters !-- express perfection !
That will be a much better thing .
Will not it be beautiful in her dark hair ?"
Nor could she leave the place in which Willoughby remained , busy in new engagements , and new schemes , in which SHE could have no share , without shedding many tears .
He is undoubtedly a sensible man , and in his manners perfectly the gentleman ."
It had not been forgotten before , but it had been soon acknowledged vain to attempt to fix a day .
The black mare was blameless ; _they_ were right who had named Mrs . Churchill as the cause .
It is not Swisserland , but it will be something for a young man so much in want of a change .
Pray say so , with my compliments .
" I do not wonder Captain Wentworth is delighted !
The room at the Crown was to witness it ;-- but it would be better than a common meeting in a crowd .
The difference of Harriet at Mrs . Goddard ' s , or in London , made perhaps an unreasonable difference in Emma ' s sensations ; but she could not think of her in London without objects of curiosity and employment , which must be averting the past , and carrying her out of herself .
he is black at heart , hollow and black !"
" A very simple one -- to be of use to Mr .
Her fears and her difficulties were immediately before him .
How can I ask them away from her ?"
What is the amount of his fortune ?"
I long to make apologies , excuses , to urge something for myself .
The rain was a mere trifle , and Anne was most sincere in preferring a walk with Mr Elliot .
Beyond a competence , it can afford no real satisfaction , as far as mere self is concerned ."
He had never indulged much hope , he had now none , of ever reading her name in any other page of his favourite work .
She resigned herself at first to all the misery of her situation ; and happy had it been if she had not lived to overcome those regrets which the remembrance of me occasioned .
You are quite mistaken .
With men he can be rational and unaffected , but when he has ladies to please , every feature works ."
" Well , as your joint acquaintance , then , I shall be very happy to see Captain Benwick ."
" By all means .
Her spirits were not high .
Some might think him , and others might think her , the most in luck .
Mrs . Jennings wrote to tell the wonderful tale , to vent her honest indignation against the jilting girl , and pour forth her compassion towards poor Mr . Edward , who , she was sure , had quite doted upon the worthless hussy , and was now , by all accounts , almost broken - hearted , at Oxford .-- " I do think ," she continued , " nothing was ever carried on so sly ; for it was but two days before Lucy called and sat a couple of hours with me .
" There !
There must be the same immediate association of thought , though she was very far from conceiving it to be of equal pain .
One has not great hopes from Birmingham .
" I assure you it is not in my power ."
" A sore - throat !-- I hope not infectious .
" Must I go first ?
" I am afraid ," said he , composing his features , " I am very much afraid , my dear Emma , that you will not smile when you hear it ."
He had passed out of the room without a look !
It would be impossible to say what Emma felt , on hearing this -- which of all her unpleasant sensations was uppermost .
He gave me a quiet hint ; I told him he was mistaken ; he asked my pardon and said no more .
The rest was all tranquillity ; till , just as they were moving , she heard the Admiral say to Mary --
Jane Fairfax did look and move superior ; but Emma suspected she might have been glad to change feelings with Harriet , very glad to have purchased the mortification of having loved -- yes , of having loved even Mr . Elton in vain -- by the surrender of all the dangerous pleasure of knowing herself beloved by the husband of her friend .
Ferrars ."
It is encouraging people to marry if you make so much of them ."
Can any thing be stronger ?"
You were kept waiting at the door -- I was quite ashamed -- but somehow there was a little bustle -- for it so happened that we had not heard the knock , and till you were on the stairs , we did not know any body was coming .
I thought I had seen you first in February ."
repeated Lucy .
Give him a book , and he will read all day long ."
It is of importance that no time should be lost with him , for he will of course have much to do relative to his ordination ."
Composure with a witness !
What Edward had done to forfeit the right of eldest son , might have puzzled many people to find out ; and what Robert had done to succeed to it , might have puzzled them still more .
With all my soul I wish them happy , and rejoice over every circumstance in favour of it .
said Marianne to herself as she walked on .
-- No , no ; they were shut up in the drawing - room together , and all I heard was only by listening at the door ."
` If you must go , my dear ,' said I , ` you must , and I will say you are laid down upon the bed .'"
She had been for three months her companion , was still under her care , and she was known to have been greatly injured , and long unhappy .
The continuance of their engagement , and the means that were able to be taken for promoting its end , was all her communication ; and this produced from Mrs . Jennings the following natural remark .
This has always been your doctrine , I am sure ."
As Elinor and Marianne were walking together the next morning the latter communicated a piece of news to her sister , which in spite of all that she knew before of Marianne ' s imprudence and want of thought , surprised her by its extravagant testimony of both .
The dinner , already ordered at the inn , was at last , though unwillingly , accepted as a excuse ; but they seemed almost hurt that Captain Wentworth should have brought any such party to Lyme , without considering it as a thing of course that they should dine with them .
" Pray ," said Captain Wentworth , immediately , " can you tell us the name of the gentleman who is just gone away ?"
If the girl likes another man better , it is very fit she should have him ."
But not so easily did Elinor recover from the alarm into which it had thrown her .
" I am forgetting that I am not acquainted with her .
She did not think he was quite so hardened as his wife , though growing very like her ;-- _she_ spoke some of her feelings , by observing audibly to her partner ,
Their journey was safely performed .
" Remember that whatever your conjectures may be , you have no right to repeat them ."
It had just occurred to Mrs . Weston that Mrs . Elton must be asked to begin the ball ; that she would expect it ; which interfered with all their wishes of giving Emma that distinction .-- Emma heard the sad truth with fortitude .
" I rather wonder that it was never made before ."
She should put it off as long as she could ;" but was not easy till she had talked Charles into driving her over on an early day , and was in a very animated , comfortable state of imaginary agitation , when she came back .
What have they brought you ?"
She fell into violent hysterics immediately , with such screams as reached your brother ' s ears , as he was sitting in his own dressing - room down stairs , thinking about writing a letter to his steward in the country .
Poor old John , I have a great regard for him ; he was clerk to my poor father twenty - seven years ; and now , poor old man , he is bed - ridden , and very poorly with the rheumatic gout in his joints -- I must go and see him to - day ; and so will Jane , I am sure , if she gets out at all .
They continued together with unabated regard however , till the marriage of Miss Campbell , who by that chance , that luck which so often defies anticipation in matrimonial affairs , giving attraction to what is moderate rather than to what is superior , engaged the affections of Mr . Dixon , a young man , rich and agreeable , almost as soon as they were acquainted ; and was eligibly and happily settled , while Jane Fairfax had yet her bread to earn .
She was persuaded that under every disadvantage of disapprobation at home , and every anxiety attending his profession , all their probable fears , delays , and disappointments , she should yet have been a happier woman in maintaining the engagement , than she had been in the sacrifice of it ; and this , she fully believed , had the usual share , had even more than the usual share of all such solicitudes and suspense been theirs , without reference to the actual results of their case , which , as it happened , would have bestowed earlier prosperity than could be reasonably calculated on .
" Certainly .
The extent of your admiration may take you by surprize some day or other ."
What had really passed between them was to this effect .
Come , he knows himself there .
no ," said he ; " it would be the extreme of imprudence .
" Strange that it would !"
To atone for this conduct therefore , Elinor took immediate possession of the post of civility which she had assigned herself , behaved with the greatest attention to Mrs . Jennings , talked with her , laughed with her , and listened to her whenever she could ; and Mrs . Jennings on her side treated them both with all possible kindness , was solicitous on every occasion for their ease and enjoyment , and only disturbed that she could not make them choose their own dinners at the inn , nor extort a confession of their preferring salmon to cod , or boiled fowls to veal cutlets .
Anne is too delicate for them ."
" Our little friend Harriet Smith , however , is just such another pretty kind of young person .
You will find , whenever the subject becomes freed from its present restraints , that it did not take her wholly by surprize .
Just as they were setting off , the gentlemen returned .
While her father spoke , there was a knock at the door .
If they marry , they will be sure of doing well , and if they do not , they may all live very comfortably together on the interest of ten thousand pounds ."
What she would engage to do towards augmenting their income was next to be considered ; and here it plainly appeared , that though Edward was now her only son , he was by no means her eldest ; for while Robert was inevitably endowed with a thousand pounds a - year , not the smallest objection was made against Edward ' s taking orders for the sake of two hundred and fifty at the utmost ; nor was anything promised either for the present or in future , beyond the ten thousand pounds , which had been given with Fanny .
" Oh !
Nobody could do it , but that good fellow " ( pointing to Captain Wentworth .)
Mine is a misery which nothing can do away ."
I am sure there is nobody ' s praise that could give us so much pleasure as Miss Woodhouse ' s .
` How d ' ye do ?'
Now was not it so ?-- You saw it all ; and was not you quite struck with it ?"
--
" What magnificent orders would travel from this family to London ," said Edward , " in such an event !
From this moment her mind was never quiet ; the expectation of seeing him every hour of the day , made her unfit for any thing .
" There was a strong expectation of his coming soon after the marriage , but it ended in nothing ; and I have not heard him mentioned lately ."
With apprehensive caution therefore it was revealed , and he was listened to with unexpected calmness .
" Well ," said the still waiting Harriet ;--" well -- and -- and what shall I do ?"
To some few of the company it appeared rather a bold undertaking , considering the time of year , and that it had rained every day for the last fortnight ;-- and Mrs . Dashwood , who had already a cold , was persuaded by Elinor to stay at home .
" And I am quite serious too , I assure you ," replied Mrs . Elton gaily , " in resolving to be always on the watch , and employing my friends to watch also , that nothing really unexceptionable may pass us ."
I saw Jane Fairfax and conversed with her , with admiration and pleasure always -- but with no thought beyond ."
He had been remarkably handsome in his youth ; and , at fifty - four , was still a very fine man .
The shower was heavy , but short ; and it had not been over five minutes , when in came Harriet , with just the heated , agitated look which hurrying thither with a full heart was likely to give ; and the " Oh !
Once so much to each other !
" His fortune too !-- for at my time of life you know , everybody cares about THAT ;-- and though I neither know nor desire to know , what it really is , I am sure it must be a good one ."
no , that is clear enough .
those were pleasant days when I had the Laconia !
Anne caught his eye , saw his cheeks glow , and his mouth form itself into a momentary expression of contempt , and turned away , that she might neither see nor hear more to vex her .
Mary spoke with animation of their meeting with , or rather missing , Mr Elliot so extraordinarily .
Women of that class have great opportunities , and if they are intelligent may be well worth listening to .
Elinor was silent .
Elinor , who knew that such grief , shocking as it was to witness it , must have its course , watched by her till this excess of suffering had somewhat spent itself , and then turning eagerly to Willoughby ' s letter , read as follows :
Mrs . Churchill rules at Enscombe , and is a very odd - tempered woman ; and his coming now , depends upon her being willing to spare him ."
" Very true , my love , very true .
I can only say , ` No , I shall not ;' and then they say again , ` Yes , you will ,' and there is an end of it ."
" Did you say that you had something to tell me , sir ?"
cried Mrs . Jennings ; " very pretty , indeed !
Other poultry - yards in the neighbourhood also suffered .-- Pilfering was _housebreaking_ to Mr . Woodhouse ' s fears .-- He was very uneasy ; and but for the sense of his son - in - law ' s protection , would have been under wretched alarm every night of his life .
And now to be so rewarded !
Miss Bates said a great deal ; Mrs . Elton swelled at the idea of Miss Woodhouse ' s presiding ; Mr . Knightley ' s answer was the most distinct .
We feel things differently .
That she was coming to apologize , and that they should have to spend the evening by themselves , was the first black idea ; and Mary was quite ready to be affronted , when Louisa made all right by saying , that she only came on foot , to leave more room for the harp , which was bringing in the carriage .
" Yes , they are about one hundred and ninety miles from London .
And now she was very conscious that she ought to have prevented them .-- She felt that she had been risking her friend ' s happiness on most insufficient grounds .
The party from Uppercross passing down by the now deserted and melancholy looking rooms , and still descending , soon found themselves on the sea - shore ; and lingering only , as all must linger and gaze on a first return to the sea , who ever deserved to look on it at all , proceeded towards the Cobb , equally their object in itself and on Captain Wentworth ' s account : for in a small house , near the foot of an old pier of unknown date , were the Harvilles settled .
It was a great satisfaction to us to hear it , I assure you ."
My dear Isabella , I have not heard you make one inquiry about Mr . Perry yet ; and he never forgets you ."
Do you sit where you like ?
But she was not at all sorry that she had abused the housekeeper the other day .-- Shocking plan , living together .
But she probably had something of that in her thoughts , when alluding to the misunderstandings which he had given us hints of before .
" A knock at the door !
" Upon my honour I did .-- I met Colonel Brandon Monday morning in Bond - street , just before we left town , and he told me of it directly ."
This was the amount of the whole story ,-- of his communication and of Harriet ' s as soon as she had recovered her senses and speech .-- He dared not stay longer than to see her well ; these several delays left him not another minute to lose ; and Emma engaging to give assurance of her safety to Mrs . Goddard , and notice of there being such a set of people in the neighbourhood to Mr . Knightley , he set off , with all the grateful blessings that she could utter for her friend and herself .
" And , upon my word , they have an air of great probability .
If Elizabeth could but have heard this !
Your person , your disposition , accomplishments , manner ; they were all present to me ."
In short , I could learn nothing but that she was gone ; all the rest , for eight long months , was left to conjecture .
You are not striving to look taller than any body else .
Sir John was loud in his admiration at the end of every song , and as loud in his conversation with the others while every song lasted .
He is half way to Windsor by this time ."
Mrs . Weston undertakes to direct the whole ."
His tone , his expressions , his choice of subject , his knowing where to stop ; it was all the operation of a sensible , discerning mind .
" She would indeed .
That he was a sensible man , an agreeable man , that he talked well , professed good opinions , seemed to judge properly and as a man of principle , this was all clear enough .
Could not be a better time , Sir Walter , for having a choice of tenants , very responsible tenants .
They had been arrived only a few minutes , and Mr . Weston had scarcely finished his explanation of Frank ' s being a day before his time , and her father was yet in the midst of his very civil welcome and congratulations , when she appeared , to have her share of surprize , introduction , and pleasure .
Your meaning must be unequivocal ; no doubts or demurs : and such expressions of gratitude and concern for the pain you are inflicting as propriety requires , will present themselves unbidden to _your_ mind , I am persuaded .
I said to my mother , ` Upon my word , ma ' am --.'
But these measures , however good in themselves , were insufficient for the real extent of the evil , the whole of which Sir Walter found himself obliged to confess to her soon afterwards .
Only give me a carte - blanche .-- I am Lady Patroness , you know .
Born to the prospect of such affluence !
" Very like Maple Grove indeed !-- She was quite struck by the likeness !-- That room was the very shape and size of the morning - room at Maple Grove ; her sister ' s favourite room ."
Affecting that air of playfulness , therefore , which is delightful in a woman one loves , she opened the letter directly , and read its contents .
Miss Nash had been telling her something , which she repeated immediately with great delight .
If Louisa recovered , it would all be well again .
I am sure I do not know ."
" He was too good !-- she could not endure the thought !-- she would not give him such a troublesome office for the world ,"-- brought on the desired repetition of entreaties and assurances ,-- and a very few minutes settled the business .
The Mr Musgroves had their own game to guard , and to destroy , their own horses , dogs , and newspapers to engage them , and the females were fully occupied in all the other common subjects of housekeeping , neighbours , dress , dancing , and music .
I would assist any brother officer ' s wife that I could , and I would bring anything of Harville ' s from the world ' s end , if he wanted it .
Edward , having carried his thanks to Colonel Brandon , proceeded with his happiness to Lucy ; and such was the excess of it by the time he reached Bartlett ' s Buildings , that she was able to assure Mrs . Jennings , who called on her again the next day with her congratulations , that she had never seen him in such spirits before in her life .
" Perhaps you mean -- my brother -- you mean Mrs .-- Mrs . ROBERT Ferrars ."
" You are silent , Miss Fairfax -- but I hope you mean to take an interest in this news .
He had not left her long , by no means long enough for her to have the slightest inclination for thinking of any body else , when a letter was brought her from Randalls -- a very thick letter ;-- she guessed what it must contain , and deprecated the necessity of reading it .-- She was now in perfect charity with Frank Churchill ; she wanted no explanations , she wanted only to have her thoughts to herself -- and as for understanding any thing he wrote , she was sure she was incapable of it .-- It must be waded through , however .
My dear Emma , I am longing to talk to you .
" Yes ," said his brother quickly , " it is Randalls that does it all ."
I won ' t disturb her any longer , for she had better have her cry out at once and have done with .
You know how much he wanted money : worse than myself .
And to what part of it ?"
Anne had always thought such a style of intercourse highly imprudent ; but she had ceased to endeavour to check it , from believing that , though there were on each side continual subjects of offence , neither family could now do without it .
said she .
Palmer ?"
And you can be always with me .
Anne admired the good acting of the friend , in being able to shew such pleasure as she did , in the expectation and in the actual arrival of the very person whose presence must really be interfering with her prime object .
This was astonishing !-- She could not have believed it possible that the taste or the pride of Miss Fairfax could endure such society and friendship as the Vicarage had to offer .
You have cured her of her school - girl ' s giggle ; she really does you credit ."
` Miss Woodhouse calls me the child of good fortune .'
cried Harriet , coming eagerly into the room -- " is not this the oddest news that ever was ?"
They were going to remove immediately to Richmond .
Miss Harriet Smith may not find offers of marriage flow in so fast , though she is a very pretty girl .
The intimacy had been formed before our marriage .
I thought I should have fainted .
cried Captain Wentworth , instantly , and with half a glance at Anne , " it is the very man we passed ."
" Well ,"-- he replied --" once more good bye .
" It is not every one ," said Elinor , " who has your passion for dead leaves ."
( giggling as she spoke ) I ' d lay my life I know what my cousins will say , when they hear of it .
Have you not seen this ?
" I wonder what they are all doing -- whether his sisters know -- if he is unhappy , they will be unhappy too .
But in sorrow she must be equally carried away by her fancy , and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure she was beyond alloy .
It was several days before Willoughby ' s name was mentioned before Marianne by any of her family ; Sir John and Mrs . Jennings , indeed , were not so nice ; their witticisms added pain to many a painful hour ;-- but one evening , Mrs . Dashwood , accidentally taking up a volume of Shakespeare , exclaimed ,
If a separation of two months should not have cooled him , there were dangers and evils before her :-- caution for him and for herself would be necessary .
" What a charming thing it is that Mrs . Dashwood can spare you both for so long a time together !"
" Perhaps , then , it would be better for all parties , if the sum were diminished one half .-- Five hundred pounds would be a prodigious increase to their fortunes !"
What nonsense one talks , Miss Woodhouse , when hard at work , if one talks at all ;-- your real workmen , I suppose , hold their tongues ; but we gentlemen labourers if we get hold of a word -- Miss Fairfax said something about conjecturing .
She was very much affected by the view of his disposition towards her , which all these things made apparent .
They walked along the road through the valley , and chiefly in silence , for Marianne ' s MIND could not be controlled , and Elinor , satisfied with gaining one point , would not then attempt more .
The evening of this day was very long , and melancholy , at Hartfield .
This distinction appeared to increase , and there was one speech of Louisa ' s which struck her .
Her friends evidently thought this good enough for her ; and it _was_ good enough .
Jane came back delighted yesterday .
--
Captain Benwick listened attentively , and seemed grateful for the interest implied ; and though with a shake of the head , and sighs which declared his little faith in the efficacy of any books on grief like his , noted down the names of those she recommended , and promised to procure and read them .
Emma ' s pensive meditations , as she walked home , were not interrupted ; but on entering the parlour , she found those who must rouse her .
With an alacrity beyond the common impulse of a spirit which yet was never indifferent to the credit of doing every thing well and attentively , with the real good - will of a mind delighted with its own ideas , did she then do all the honours of the meal , and help and recommend the minced chicken and scalloped oysters , with an urgency which she knew would be acceptable to the early hours and civil scruples of their guests .
It is a pity that they were ever got over ."
The young ladies , as well as their mother , were perfectly satisfied with having two entire strangers of the party , and wished for no more .
Mrs Musgrove was giving Mrs Croft the history of her eldest daughter ' s engagement , and just in that inconvenient tone of voice which was perfectly audible while it pretended to be a whisper .
Elinor repeated the particulars of it , as she had given them to John ; and their effect on Robert , though very different , was not less striking than it had been on HIM .
It was to be a whole - length in water - colours , like Mr . John Knightley ' s , and was destined , if she could please herself , to hold a very honourable station over the mantelpiece .
But though SHE never spoke of it out of her own family , Elinor could see its influence on her mind , in the something like confusion of countenance with which she entered , and an attempt at cordiality in her behaviour to herself .
said she , with vexation .
" No , not now , I thank you .
Miss Churchill , however , being of age , and with the full command of her fortune -- though her fortune bore no proportion to the family - estate -- was not to be dissuaded from the marriage , and it took place , to the infinite mortification of Mr . and Mrs . Churchill , who threw her off with due decorum .
At any rate , said I , it will be better than a long engagement ."
" He may have a great deal of influence on some points ," continued Mrs . Weston , " and on others , very little : and among those , on which she is beyond his reach , it is but too likely , may be this very circumstance of his coming away from them to visit us ."
Marianne hardly knew what to say .
" I never should have presumed to think of it at first ," said she , " but for you .
What had Edward felt on being within four miles from Barton , on seeing her mother ' s servant , on hearing Lucy ' s message !
Although in one instance the bearers of not good tidings , Mr . and Mrs . Weston ' s visit this morning was in another respect particularly opportune .
YOUR competence and MY wealth are very much alike , I dare say ; and without them , as the world goes now , we shall both agree that every kind of external comfort must be wanting .
Louisa seemed the principal arranger of the plan ; and , as she went a little way with them , down the hill , still talking to Henrietta , Mary took the opportunity of looking scornfully around her , and saying to Captain Wentworth --
But I see what you mean .
" I merely asked , whether you had known much of Miss Fairfax and her party at Weymouth ."
And away he ran .
And Mr . Weston tried , in vain , to make them harmonise better .
He would go , though I told him how ill I was .
The brothers talked of their own concerns and pursuits , but principally of those of the elder , whose temper was by much the most communicative , and who was always the greater talker .
He thought it very well done of Mr . Knightley to invite them -- very kind and sensible -- much cleverer than dining out .-- He was not fond of dining out ."
You will find me a very awkward narrator , Miss Dashwood ; I hardly know where to begin .
You , who have not a mother ' s feelings , are a great deal the properest person .
" Indifferent !
MY DEAR MADAM ,
You will hardly believe me -- but twice in one week he and Mr . Bragge went to London and back again with four horses ."
Every body seemed happy ; and the praise of being a delightful ball , which is seldom bestowed till after a ball has ceased to be , was repeatedly given in the very beginning of the existence of this .
" Oh !
Well , Mr . Knightley , and so you actually saw the letter ; well --"
Is Perry going to set up his carriage , Frank ?
" You are prepared for the worst , I see -- and very bad it is .
" I have never mentioned it to her , but of course she must ."
it DID torture me .
She had reason to believe her nearly recovered from her cold , and it was desirable that she should have as much time as possible for getting the better of her other complaint before the gentleman ' s return .
But poor Harriet was such an engrossing charge !
Harriet could just answer , " Oh !
I shall now live solely for my family .
Emma saw him only once ; but two or three times every day Harriet was sure _just_ to meet with him , or _just_ to miss him , _just_ to hear his voice , or see his shoulder , _just_ to have something occur to preserve him in her fancy , in all the favouring warmth of surprize and conjecture .
But it is even so .
To begin without knowing that at such a time there will be the means of marrying , I hold to be very unsafe and unwise , and what I think all parents should prevent as far as they can ."
Scarcely had she so determined it , when the figure of a man on horseback drew her eyes to the window .
" Yet I hardly know how ," cried Marianne , " unless it had been under totally different circumstances .
I wish you may not catch cold ."
" Why , pretty well ; but not quite well .
" There are inconveniences attending such feelings as Marianne ' s , which all the charms of enthusiasm and ignorance of the world cannot atone for .
She knew the limitations of her own powers too well to attempt more than she could perform with credit ; she wanted neither taste nor spirit in the little things which are generally acceptable , and could accompany her own voice well .
She wished him not so near her .
The ladies here probably exchanged looks which meant , " Men never know when things are dirty or not ;" and the gentlemen perhaps thought each to himself , " Women will have their little nonsenses and needless cares ."
I have no pleasure in seeing my friends , unless I can believe myself fit to be seen ."
Approve my charade and my intentions in the same glance .'
Small heart had Harriet for visiting .
is Fanny ill ?"
I wish you had been with us yesterday , for then you might have decided between us ; and I am sure you would have thought as I did , unless you had been determined to give it against me ."
And this belief produced another dread .
I know the summer will pass happily away .
no -- what an impudent dog I was !-- How could I dare --"
You are always labouring and toiling , exposed to every risk and hardship .
Do not you begin to feel that now ?
" Indeed , I can easily believe that it was a very great relief to you , to acknowledge your situation to me , and be assured that you shall never have reason to repent it .
Early in February , within a fortnight from the receipt of Willoughby ' s letter , Elinor had the painful office of informing her sister that he was married .
" The last time I saw her she had a red nose , but I hope that may not happen every day ."
" Oh !
you amuse me excessively .
We returned unwounded , and the meeting , therefore , never got abroad ."
" True .
To hear those beautiful lines which have frequently almost driven me wild , pronounced with such impenetrable calmness , such dreadful indifference !"
" Your wife !-- The letter was in your own hand - writing ."
It is not fit that he should be living about at his own charge now , at lodgings and taverns ."
" Opportunity !"
In all other respects , her visit began and proceeded very well .
Her second note , which had been written on the morning after the dance at the Middletons ', was in these words :--
Our neighbourhood cannot spare such a pleasant family .
I have no business to put myself forward ."
Nothing so easy as for a young lady to raise her expectations too high .
I have no fears at all for myself ; and I should have no scruples of staying as late as Mrs . Weston , but on your account .
I shall forget my own name soon , I suppose .
And how you will explain away any part of your guilt in that dreadful business , I confess is beyond my comprehension ."
He was coming through the hall .
She considered -- resolved -- and , trying to smile , began --
" And such being the case ," continued Mrs Smith , after a short pause , " I hope you believe that I do know how to value your kindness in coming to me this morning .
Lady Russell could not hear the door - bell without feeling that it might be his herald ; nor could Anne return from any stroll of solitary indulgence in her father ' s grounds , or any visit of charity in the village , without wondering whether she might see him or hear of him .
" Say nothing , my dear Emma , while you oblige me to read -- not even of Mrs . Elton .
It may not be felt in Bath , with your nice pavements ; but in the country it is of some consequence .
My own self .
Oh !
Emma gave a start , which did not seem like being prepared -- and her eyes , in eager gaze , said , " No , this is impossible !"
Impossible that any situation could be more replete with comfort ; if we except , perhaps , Mrs . Suckling ' s own family , and Mrs . Bragge ' s ; but Mrs . Smallridge is intimate with both , and in the very same neighbourhood :-- lives only four miles from Maple Grove .
It was too great a shock to be borne with calmness , and she immediately left the room .
It was a very great relief to Emma to find Harriet as desirous as herself to avoid a meeting .
Was not she like a daughter , his eldest daughter ?-- he must tell her ; and Miss Bates being present , it passed , of course , to Mrs . Cole , Mrs . Perry , and Mrs . Elton , immediately afterwards .
The Crofts had placed themselves in lodgings in Gay Street , perfectly to Sir Walter ' s satisfaction .
I really think Charles might as well have told his father we would all come .
She endeavoured to be composed , and to be just .
" As you do us such ample justice now ," said Emma , laughing , " I will venture to ask , whether you did not come a little doubtfully at first ?
He stood his chance for the rest ; wrote up for leave of absence , but without waiting the return , travelled night and day till he got to Portsmouth , rowed off to the Grappler that instant , and never left the poor fellow for a week .
And after such success , you know !-- Every body said that Mr . Weston would never marry again .
I am sure I had much rather hear you .
such delightful proofs of Hartfield ' s attraction , as those sort of visits conveyed , might shortly be over .
The particular circumstances between them made a difficulty of that which to any other person would have been the easiest thing in the world ; but she equally feared to say too much or too little , and sat deliberating over her paper , with the pen in her band , till broken in on by the entrance of Edward himself .
Kitty , a fair but frozen maid , Kindled a flame I yet deplore , The hood - wink ' d boy I called to aid , Though of his near approach afraid , So fatal to my suit before .
" Miss Woodhouse -- if you are at leisure -- I have something that I should like to tell you -- a sort of confession to make -- and then , you know , it will be over ."
It was bad enough that a Mrs Clay should be always before her ; but that a deeper hypocrite should be added to their party , seemed the destruction of everything like peace and comfort .
My being saved from pain is a very secondary consideration .
I was the most miserable wretch !"
Emma saw his anxiety , and wishing to appease it , at least for the present , said , and with a sincerity which no one could question --
" One would rather have a stranger preferred than one ' s very particular friend -- with a stranger it might not recur again -- but the misery of having a very particular friend always at hand , to do every thing better than one does oneself !-- Poor Mrs . Dixon !
She smiled her acceptance ; and nothing less than a summons from Richmond was to take him back before the following evening .
Remember how few minutes I was at Randalls , and in how bewildered , how mad a state : and I am not much better yet ; still insane either from happiness or misery .
A poet in love must be encouraged in both capacities , or neither .
` Do not imagine , madam ,' she continued , ` that I was taught wrong .
Anne was ashamed .
They were obliged to move .
" I have just been thinking of Betty ' s sister , my dear .
If _she_ had so misinterpreted his feelings , she had little right to wonder that _he_ , with self - interest to blind him , should have mistaken hers .
The land was so very desirable for me in every respect , so immediately adjoining my own property , that I felt it my duty to buy it .
I have always heard of Lady Russell as a woman of the greatest influence with everybody !
Married women , you know , may be safely authorised .
I wanted them to put off the wedding ."
" That is a grand pianoforte , and he might think it too large for Mrs . Bates ' s house ."
Now do not you feel that you had ?
" I say nothing of which I am ashamed ," replied he , with lively impudence .
He is totally beyond the reach of any sentiment of justice or compassion .
He did not boast , but it naturally betrayed itself , that he had persuaded his aunt where his uncle could do nothing , and on her laughing and noticing it , he owned that he believed ( excepting one or two points ) he could _with_ _time_ persuade her to any thing .
We are not all born to be handsome .
What is the foolish girl about ?"
You will not regard being tired .
" Harriet !"
He coloured as he replied , " You are very kind , but I have no idea of returning into Devonshire immediately .
Her house will therefore be almost completely fitted up as soon as she takes it ."
" That is a good thing .
at three - and - twenty to be the king of his company -- the great man -- the practised politician , who is to read every body ' s character , and make every body ' s talents conduce to the display of his own superiority ; to be dispensing his flatteries around , that he may make all appear like fools compared with himself !
He had done his duty and could return to his son .
In spite of his being allowed once more to live , however , he did not feel the continuance of his existence secure , till he had revealed his present engagement ; for the publication of that circumstance , he feared , might give a sudden turn to his constitution , and carry him off as rapidly as before .
" Yes , for I am unable to keep my engagement with you .
" No , no ," said she , " you are quite unreasonable .
" I cannot agree with you , papa ; you know I cannot .
" She expects to be confined in February ," continued Mrs . Jennings .
They were wretched together .
It opens his designs to his family , it introduces you among them , it diffuses through the party those pleasantest feelings of our nature , eager curiosity and warm prepossession .
Invite them both ."
You are not afraid of being supposed ashamed .
She suspected that it _had_ ; that it would not have been so resolutely encountered but in full expectation of hearing from some one very dear , and that it had not been in vain .
What shall we do to rouse them ?
For where she DOES dislike , I know it is most violent ."
Mr . Weston was a native of Highbury , and born of a respectable family , which for the last two or three generations had been rising into gentility and property .
As a walking companion , Emma had very early foreseen how useful she might find her .
Such as Mrs . Elton appeared to her on this second interview , such she appeared whenever they met again ,-- self - important , presuming , familiar , ignorant , and ill - bred .
They are not far off .
To Marianne , indeed , the meeting between Edward and her sister was but a continuation of that unaccountable coldness which she had often observed at Norland in their mutual behaviour .
She exerted herself , and did try to make her comfortable , by considering all that had passed as a mere trifle , and quite unworthy of being dwelt on ,
Anne would have been particularly obliged to her cousin , if he would have walked by her side all the way to Camden Place , without saying a word .
She gave him credit for stationing himself where he might gaze and gaze again without offence ; but was really obliged to put an end to it , and request him to place himself elsewhere .
Happy had it been for her , if her regard for Edward had depended less on his own merit , than on the merit of his nearest relations !
You are very obliging to say such things -- but certainly not .
I must confess it is a recommendation to me .
" Aye , aye ," said Mrs . Jennings , " we know the reason of all that very well ; if a certain person who shall be nameless , had been there , you would not have been a bit tired : and to say the truth it was not very pretty of him not to give you the meeting when he was invited ."
He stopt .
We were principally in town , living in very good style .
He may be very ` aimable ,' have very good manners , and be very agreeable ; but he can have no English delicacy towards the feelings of other people : nothing really amiable about him ."
Anne , have you courage to go with me , and pay a visit in that house ?
Anne , satisfied at a very early period of Lady Russell ' s meaning to love Captain Wentworth as she ought , had no other alloy to the happiness of her prospects than what arose from the consciousness of having no relations to bestow on him which a man of sense could value .
Elinor , though never less disposed to speak than at that moment , obliged herself to answer such an attack as this , and , therefore , trying to smile , replied , " And have you really , Ma ' am , talked yourself into a persuasion of my sister ' s being engaged to Mr . Willoughby ?
It was a great comfort to her to be sure of exciting no interest in ONE person at least among their circle of friends : a great comfort to know that there was ONE who would meet her without feeling any curiosity after particulars , or any anxiety for her sister ' s health .
At seven o ' clock , leaving Marianne still sweetly asleep , she joined Mrs . Jennings in the drawing - room to tea .
She was a plain , motherly kind of woman , who had worked hard in her youth , and now thought herself entitled to the occasional holiday of a tea - visit ; and having formerly owed much to Mr . Woodhouse ' s kindness , felt his particular claim on her to leave her neat parlour , hung round with fancy - work , whenever she could , and win or lose a few sixpences by his fireside .
I know very little of Dorsetshire ; but , my dear Elinor , I shall be exceedingly glad to know more of it ; and I think I can answer for your having Fanny and myself among the earliest and best pleased of your visitors ."
He thanked her , observing , " How lucky that we should arrive at the same moment !
Frank Churchill caught the name .
Her answers to the kindness and the remarks of her companions were at first unconsciously given .
Charles , being somewhat more mindful of the probabilities of the case , only nodded in reply , and walked away .
and it was but yesterday I was telling Mr . Cole , I really was ashamed to look at our new grand pianoforte in the drawing - room , while I do not know one note from another , and our little girls , who are but just beginning , perhaps may never make any thing of it ; and there is poor Jane Fairfax , who is mistress of music , has not any thing of the nature of an instrument , not even the pitifullest old spinet in the world , to amuse herself with .-- I was saying this to Mr . Cole but yesterday , and he quite agreed with me ; only he is so particularly fond of music that he could not help indulging himself in the purchase , hoping that some of our good neighbours might be so obliging occasionally to put it to a better use than we can ; and that really is the reason why the instrument was bought -- or else I am sure we ought to be ashamed of it .-- We are in great hopes that Miss Woodhouse may be prevailed with to try it this evening ."
Is not she an angel in every gesture ?
CHAPTER XV
Before this time last year I assure you we had had a delightful exploring party from Maple Grove to Kings Weston ."
" They are blended ," said he , " I acknowledge ; and , were she prosperous , I could allow much for the occasional prevalence of the ridiculous over the good .
" Have you an agreeable neighbourhood here ?
In this situation , Elinor , roused from sleep by her agitation and sobs , first perceived her ; and after observing her for a few moments with silent anxiety , said , in a tone of the most considerate gentleness ,
Their engagements at Exeter instantly gave way before such an invitation , and Lady Middleton was thrown into no little alarm on the return of Sir John , by hearing that she was very soon to receive a visit from two girls whom she had never seen in her life , and of whose elegance ,-- whose tolerable gentility even , she could have no proof ; for the assurances of her husband and mother on that subject went for nothing at all .
" And I assure you , Mr . Weston , I have very little doubt that my opinion will be decidedly in his favour .
Birth and good manners are essential ; but a little learning is by no means a dangerous thing in good company ; on the contrary , it will do very well .
Willoughby was a young man of good abilities , quick imagination , lively spirits , and open , affectionate manners .
" Yes ; you see his papa can , and why should not I ?
Would not Harriet be the very creature described ?
She only knew that Henrietta was at home again ; and that Louisa , though considered to be recovering fast , was still in Lyme ; and she was thinking of them all very intently one evening , when a thicker letter than usual from Mary was delivered to her ; and , to quicken the pleasure and surprise , with Admiral and Mrs Croft ' s compliments .
They knew he was to dine in Lansdown Crescent .
She had not seen him before since his engagement became public , and therefore not since his knowing her to be acquainted with it ; which , with the consciousness of what she had been thinking of , and what she had to tell him , made her feel particularly uncomfortable for some minutes .
" Yes , sometimes he can ."
Mrs . Dashwood was surprised only for a moment at seeing him ; for his coming to Barton was , in her opinion , of all things the most natural .
But is it possible that you had no suspicion ?-- I mean of late .
Pray do not let them talk of it .
I wish he could have such company oftener .
I do not look upon myself as either prosperous or indulged .
" Yes ," said he , smiling --" and reason good .
How she might have felt had there been no Captain Wentworth in the case , was not worth enquiry ; for there was a Captain Wentworth ; and be the conclusion of the present suspense good or bad , her affection would be his for ever .
How unlucky !
Four - and - twenty hours later , and I should only have been a gallant Captain Wentworth , in a small paragraph at one corner of the newspapers ; and being lost in only a sloop , nobody would have thought about me ."
There is health , not merely in her bloom , but in her air , her head , her glance .
The letter was from this gentleman himself , and written in the true spirit of friendly accommodation .
The Picture , elegantly framed , came safely to hand soon after Mr . Elton ' s return , and being hung over the mantelpiece of the common sitting - room , he got up to look at it , and sighed out his half sentences of admiration just as he ought ; and as for Harriet ' s feelings , they were visibly forming themselves into as strong and steady an attachment as her youth and sort of mind admitted .
She was in no hurry at all .
I can only say that there was smoothness outwardly .
" And the thing is certainly true .
Is not that your idea ?"
You , my mother , and Margaret , must henceforth be all the world to me ; you will share my affections entirely between you .
" Depend upon me -- but ask no more questions .
She was particularly struck by his manner of considering Mr . Elton ' s house , which , as well as the church , he would go and look at , and would not join them in finding much fault with .
-- She could really say nothing .--" You are silent ," he cried , with great animation ; " absolutely silent !
" You are extremely kind ," said Jane ; " but I cannot give up my early walk .
She tried to stop him ; but vainly ; he would go on , and say it all .
And is no allowance to be made for inadvertence , or for spirits depressed by recent disappointment ?
and this was the end of it !"
His situation indeed was more than commonly joyful .
Lady Russell ' s had no success at all : could not be put up with , were not to be borne .
The lawyer plods , quite care - worn ; the physician is up at all hours , and travelling in all weather ; and even the clergyman --" she stopt a moment to consider what might do for the clergyman ;--" and even the clergyman , you know is obliged to go into infected rooms , and expose his health and looks to all the injury of a poisonous atmosphere .
those things are too common .
She felt for Harriet , with pain and with contrition ; but no flight of generosity run mad , opposing all that could be probable or reasonable , entered her brain .
" And she ," said Mrs Smith , " besides nursing me most admirably , has really proved an invaluable acquaintance .
you clever creature , that ' s very true .
I mean to make my profit of Mrs Wallis , however .
" Me !-- oh !
He had left her , promising to return ; he neither returned , nor wrote , nor relieved her ."
She was just in time to ascertain that it really was Mr Elliot , which she had never believed , before he disappeared on one side , as Mrs Clay walked quickly off on the other ; and checking the surprise which she could not but feel at such an appearance of friendly conference between two persons of totally opposite interest , she calmly said , " Yes , it is Mr Elliot , certainly .
The Crofts knew quite as many people in Bath as they wished for , and considered their intercourse with the Elliots as a mere matter of form , and not in the least likely to afford them any pleasure .
" Or rather , as I believe , she considers them impossible to exist ."
In this state of suspense they were befriended , not by any sudden illumination of Mr . Woodhouse ' s mind , or any wonderful change of his nervous system , but by the operation of the same system in another way .-- Mrs . Weston ' s poultry - house was robbed one night of all her turkeys -- evidently by the ingenuity of man .
" Oh !
I dare not let my mother know how little she eats -- so I say one thing and then I say another , and it passes off .
A little while ago , he was at Weymouth .
" Very ."
One does not , you know , after a time .
Harriet Smith was the natural daughter of somebody .
By whom can he have been instigated ?"
Between THEM no subject is finished , no communication is even made , till it has been made at least twenty times over .
She was obliged to leave the door ajar as she found it ; but she fully intended that Mr . Elton should close it .
no , upon my word I have not the smallest wish for your marrying Jane Fairfax or Jane any body .
He declares himself , that coming to Lyme for a month , did him more good than all the medicine he took ; and , that being by the sea , always makes him feel young again .
It is a very large one , I know ; and when I come to see you , I hope you will have new - furnished it , for it wanted it very much when I was there six years ago ."
I was really in pain for him ; for your hard - hearted sister , Miss Anne , seems bent on cruelty ."
But first of all , you must tell me the name of the young lady I am going to talk about .
My cousins have been so plaguing me !
There was a languor , a want of spirits , a want of union , which could not be got over .
It was beginning to rain again , and altogether there was a delay , and a bustle , and a talking , which must make all the little crowd in the shop understand that Lady Dalrymple was calling to convey Miss Elliot .
But these objections had all , with that happy ardour of youth which Marianne and her mother equally shared , been overcome or overlooked ; and Elinor , in spite of every occasional doubt of Willoughby ' s constancy , could not witness the rapture of delightful expectation which filled the whole soul and beamed in the eyes of Marianne , without feeling how blank was her own prospect , how cheerless her own state of mind in the comparison , and how gladly she would engage in the solicitude of Marianne ' s situation to have the same animating object in view , the same possibility of hope .
But Harriet was in a tremor , and could not touch it ; and Emma , never loth to be first , was obliged to examine it herself .
" I would suppose him ,-- Oh , how gladly would I suppose him , only fickle , very , very fickle ."
" When do you go back again ?"
He would not ask Harriet to dance if it were possible to be avoided : she was sure he would not -- and she was expecting him every moment to escape into the card - room .
It was not very long , though rather longer than Mr . Weston had foreseen , before she had the power of forming some opinion of Frank Churchill ' s feelings .
Anne , remembering the preconcerted visits , at all hours , of Mr Elliot , would have expected him , but for his known engagement seven miles off .
" Well ," continued Mrs Smith , triumphantly , " grant my friend the credit due to the establishment of the first point asserted .
for famous you must be to satisfy all your family ; and with no inclination for expense , no affection for strangers , no profession , and no assurance , you may find it a difficult matter ."
The possibility of a relapse would of course , in some moments , occur to remind her of what anxiety was -- but when she saw , on her frequent and minute examination , that every symptom of recovery continued , and saw Marianne at six o ' clock sink into a quiet , steady , and to all appearance comfortable , sleep , she silenced every doubt .
my dear child , do you accuse Willoughby and Marianne of concealment ?
I have done with match - making indeed .
" Thank you .
I cannot get him out of my head , but you must send for him to Barton , and Miss Marianne must try to comfort him ."
Mrs . Dashwood then begged to know to whom she was obliged .
She happened to be quite alone .
But I know very well what it is ; and I know where he is too ."
" But it is in Somersetshire .-- I cannot go into Somersetshire .-- There , where I looked forward to going ... No , Elinor , you cannot expect me to go there ."
was safely delivered of a son and heir ; a very interesting and satisfactory paragraph , at least to all those intimate connections who knew it before .
" This is full of papers belonging to him , to my husband ; a small portion only of what I had to look over when I lost him .
I have a right to talk on such subjects , without being suspected of introducing Robert Martin ."
Supposing it possible that they are not engaged , what distress would not such an enquiry inflict !
Emma was silenced .
About the third or fourth morning after their being thus resettled in Berkeley Street , Mrs . Jennings , on returning from her ordinary visit to Mrs . Palmer , entered the drawing - room , where Elinor was sitting by herself , with an air of such hurrying importance as prepared her to hear something wonderful ; and giving her time only to form that idea , began directly to justify it , by saying ,
There were more completely popular .
She will be extremely sorry to miss seeing you , Miss Woodhouse , but your kindness will excuse her .
It is Mrs . Dixon , I dare say .
He ought to have opposed the first attempt on their side to make him slight his father .
In her own room , she tried to comprehend it .
" Oh !
She felt your full meaning .
Perry .-- I want his directions no more than his drugs ."
Captain Harville , who had in truth been hearing none of it , now left his seat , and moved to a window , and Anne seeming to watch him , though it was from thorough absence of mind , became gradually sensible that he was inviting her to join him where he stood .
She only roused herself from the broodings of this restless agitation , to let Mrs Clay know that she had been seen with Mr Elliot three hours after his being supposed to be out of Bath , for having watched in vain for some intimation of the interview from the lady herself , she determined to mention it , and it seemed to her there was guilt in Mrs Clay ' s face as she listened .
I like her the better for it .
There will be enough for every hope and every fear ; and though my attachment to none can equal that of a parent , it suits my ideas of comfort better than what is warmer and blinder .
it is very fatiguing to him !
Could Anne have foreseen such a junction , she would have staid at home ; but , from some feelings of interest and curiosity , she fancied now that it was too late to retract , and the whole six set forward together in the direction chosen by the Miss Musgroves , who evidently considered the walk as under their guidance .
And I am sure , by his manner , it was no compliment .
But now , do not stand upon ceremony .
The expectation of seeing HER , however , was enough to make her interested in the engagement ; for though she could now meet Edward ' s mother without that strong anxiety which had once promised to attend such an introduction , though she could now see her with perfect indifference as to her opinion of herself , her desire of being in company with Mrs . Ferrars , her curiosity to know what she was like , was as lively as ever .
Yes , I understand the sort of mind .
` Sixty ,' said I , ` or perhaps sixty - two .'
It was all quite natural , however .
" Thank you for rousing me ," he replied .
Mrs . Dashwood looked with pleasure at Marianne , whose fine eyes were fixed so expressively on Willoughby , as plainly denoted how well she understood him .
Mrs . Weston , I am not to be talked out of my dislike of Harriet Smith , or my dread of its doing them both harm ."
" No , nothing at all ."
Mr . Elton returned , a very happy man .
Still , however , she had enough to feel !
The important Tuesday came that was to introduce the two young ladies to this formidable mother - in - law .
Knightley was at Hartfield yesterday , and spoke of it as for Saturday ."
"-- Mrs . Weston , I suppose ," interrupted Mrs . Elton , rather mortified .
He was sitting in an attitude of deep meditation , and seemed not to hear her .
Of their all removing to Donwell , Emma had already had her own passing thoughts .
Emma made as slight a reply as she could ; but it was fully sufficient for Mrs . Elton , who only wanted to be talking herself .
Do not you pity me ?"
Time , you may be sure , will make one or the other of us think differently ; and , in the meanwhile , we need not talk much on the subject ."
Either of them would , in all probability , make him an affectionate , good - humoured wife .
As my mother - in - law ' s relations , I shall be happy to show them every respect .
She had brought evil on Harriet , on herself , and she too much feared , on Mr .
They had not a fault to find in him .
They had been speaking of it as they walked about Highbury the day before , and Frank Churchill had most earnestly lamented her absence .
" Aye , my dear , that I do , indeed .
Her face was averted from those who had made the attack , and turned towards her aunt .
She heard enough to know that Mr . Weston was giving some information about his son ; she heard the words " my son ," and " Frank ," and " my son ," repeated several times over ; and , from a few other half - syllables very much suspected that he was announcing an early visit from his son ; but before she could quiet Mr . Elton , the subject was so completely past that any reviving question from her would have been awkward .
Mrs Musgrove had little arrangements of her own at her own table ; to their protection she must trust , and sinking into the chair which he had occupied , succeeding to the very spot where he had leaned and written , her eyes devoured the following words :
How quick come the reasons for approving what we like !
Let me entreat you , Miss Woodhouse , to exercise so charming a talent in favour of your friend .
Her manners were attaching , and soon banished his reserve .
CHAPTER V
Nothing but real indisposition could occasion this extraordinary delay .
" Well ," said Elinor , " it is a comfort to be prepared against the worst .
" Ah !"
Till now that she was threatened with its loss , Emma had never known how much of her happiness depended on being _first_ with Mr . Knightley , first in interest and affection .-- Satisfied that it was so , and feeling it her due , she had enjoyed it without reflection ; and only in the dread of being supplanted , found how inexpressibly important it had been .-- Long , very long , she felt she had been first ; for , having no female connexions of his own , there had been only Isabella whose claims could be compared with hers , and she had always known exactly how far he loved and esteemed Isabella .
She had a little beauty and a little accomplishment , but so little judgment that she thought herself coming with superior knowledge of the world , to enliven and improve a country neighbourhood ; and conceived Miss Hawkins to have held such a place in society as Mrs . Elton ' s consequence only could surpass .
" Elinor , for shame !"
Mrs Clay had freckles , and a projecting tooth , and a clumsy wrist , which he was continually making severe remarks upon , in her absence ; but she was young , and certainly altogether well - looking , and possessed , in an acute mind and assiduous pleasing manners , infinitely more dangerous attractions than any merely personal might have been .
Certainly she had often , especially of late , thought his manners to herself unnecessarily gallant ; but it had passed as his way , as a mere error of judgment , of knowledge , of taste , as one proof among others that he had not always lived in the best society , that with all the gentleness of his address , true elegance was sometimes wanting ; but , till this very day , she had never , for an instant , suspected it to mean any thing but grateful respect to her as Harriet ' s friend .
Neither would Mr . Knightley ' s downright , decided , commanding sort of manner , though it suits _him_ very well ; his figure , and look , and situation in life seem to allow it ; but if any young man were to set about copying him , he would not be sufferable .
You , ( to Emma ), I am certain , will never guess .-- I will tell you .-- M .
They were interrupted .
You might not give Emma such a complete education as your powers would seem to promise ; but you were receiving a very good education from _her_ , on the very material matrimonial point of submitting your own will , and doing as you were bid ; and if Weston had asked me to recommend him a wife , I should certainly have named Miss Taylor ."
" You speak too plain .
" I will not say that I am disappointed , my dear sister ," said John , as they were walking together one morning before the gates of Delaford House , " THAT would be saying too much , for certainly you have been one of the most fortunate young women in the world , as it is .
But if she continued to play whenever she was asked by Mr . Dixon , one may guess what one chuses ."
Anne smiled more than once to herself during this speech , and entered into the subject , as ready to do good by entering into the feelings of a young lady as of a young man , though here it was good of a lower standard , for what could be offered but general acquiescence ?
" Certainly -- and I think I may afford to give them five hundred pounds a - piece .
And there is one thing more preparing against him , which must be worse than all -- his mother has determined , with a very natural kind of spirit , to settle THAT estate upon Robert immediately , which might have been Edward ' s , on proper conditions .
A note was written to urge it .
She roused herself and went to him .
She had no demands on her father or sister , and her consequence was just enough increased by their handsome drawing - rooms .
I like him very well ."
Harriet seemed ready to worship her friend for a sentence so satisfactory ; and Emma was only saved from raptures and fondness , which at that moment would have been dreadful penance , by the sound of her father ' s footsteps .
She was wanting to see him again , and especially to see him in company with Mrs . Weston , upon his behaviour to whom her opinion of him was to depend .
And putting up her hand to screen her words from Emma --" A congratulatory visit , you know .-- Oh !
To feel that she ought to be in better circumstances , that a little trouble in the right place might do it , and to fear that delay might be even weakening her claims , was hard to bear .
Your own judgment must direct you ."
Not one of them had the power of removal , or of effecting any material change of society .
" I cannot believe that he has not the power of coming , if he made a point of it .
" I suppose you will not like to call at the Great House before they have been to see you ?"
" So many clever riddles as there used to be when he was young -- he wondered he could not remember them !
Delightful , charming , superior , first circles , spheres , lines , ranks , every thing -- and Mrs . Elton was wild to have the offer closed with immediately .-- On her side , all was warmth , energy , and triumph -- and she positively refused to take her friend ' s negative , though Miss Fairfax continued to assure her that she would not at present engage in any thing , repeating the same motives which she had been heard to urge before .-- Still Mrs . Elton insisted on being authorised to write an acquiescence by the morrow ' s post .-- How Jane could bear it at all , was astonishing to Emma .-- She did look vexed , she did speak pointedly -- and at last , with a decision of action unusual to her , proposed a removal .-- " Should not they walk ?
His visit was duly paid .
But if , which I rather imagine , your making the match , as you call it , means only your planning it , your saying to yourself one idle day , ` I think it would be a very good thing for Miss Taylor if Mr . Weston were to marry her ,' and saying it again to yourself every now and then afterwards , why do you talk of success ?
I will go and tell Charles , and get ready directly .
All the overpowering , blinding , bewildering , first effects of strong surprise were over with her .
If she could not have been angry with Frank Churchill too , it would have been dreadful .-- As for Jane Fairfax , she might at least relieve her feelings from any present solicitude on her account .
They were all disengaged and all happy .-- The preparatory interest of this dinner , however , was not yet over .
I am sure he has not the least idea of it .
I have no pleasure in the sort of meeting , and should be too happy to change it for a play , and with you .
She would not acknowledge that it was with any view of making a match for her , hereafter , with either of Isabella ' s sons ; but she was convinced that a daughter would suit both father and mother best .
" What an amiable creature I was !-- No wonder you should hold my speeches in such affectionate remembrance ."
Had she followed Mr . Knightley ' s known wishes , in paying that attention to Miss Fairfax , which was every way her due ; had she tried to know her better ; had she done her part towards intimacy ; had she endeavoured to find a friend there instead of in Harriet Smith ; she must , in all probability , have been spared from every pain which pressed on her now .-- Birth , abilities , and education , had been equally marking one as an associate for her , to be received with gratitude ; and the other -- what was she ?-- Supposing even that they had never become intimate friends ; that she had never been admitted into Miss Fairfax ' s confidence on this important matter -- which was most probable -- still , in knowing her as she ought , and as she might , she must have been preserved from the abominable suspicions of an improper attachment to Mr . Dixon , which she had not only so foolishly fashioned and harboured herself , but had so unpardonably imparted ; an idea which she greatly feared had been made a subject of material distress to the delicacy of Jane ' s feelings , by the levity or carelessness of Frank Churchill ' s .
You will laugh at my warmth -- but , upon my word , I talk of nothing but Jane Fairfax .-- And her situation is so calculated to affect one !-- Miss Woodhouse , we must exert ourselves and endeavour to do something for her .
Never had Marianne been so unwilling to dance in her life , as she was that evening , and never so much fatigued by the exercise .
Lucy came very shortly to claim Elinor ' s compassion on being unable to see Edward , though he had arrived in town with Mr . and Mrs . Dashwood .
" You think I ought to refuse him then ," said Harriet , looking down .
He had long made up his mind to Jane Fairfax ' s going out as governess , and could talk of it cheerfully , but Mr . Knightley ' s going to London had been an unexpected blow .
Anne was to leave them on the morrow , an event which they all dreaded .
After the waste of a few minutes in saying the proper nothings , she began to give the invitation which was to comprise all the remaining dues of the Musgroves .
Anne enquired after Captain Benwick , Mary ' s face was clouded directly .
Their children had more modern minds and manners .
In the evening , as Marianne was discovered to be musical , she was invited to play .
Why , he is down here every year ."
" We have heard Sir John admire it excessively ," said Lucy , who seemed to think some apology necessary for the freedom of her sister .
Emma had no opportunity of speaking to Mr . Knightley till after supper ; but , when they were all in the ballroom again , her eyes invited him irresistibly to come to her and be thanked .
I absolutely must go in by myself , though I hate being stuck up in the barouche - landau without a companion ; but Augusta , I believe , with her own good - will , would never stir beyond the park paling .'
Harriet would have been a better match .
This is strange indeed , when your eyes have been reproaching them every day for incautiousness ."
" How much I am obliged to you ," said he , " for telling me to come to - day !-- If it had not been for you , I should certainly have lost all the happiness of this party .
Mrs . Weston was acting no part , feigning no feelings in all that she said to him in favour of the event .-- She had been extremely surprized , never more so , than when Emma first opened the affair to her ; but she saw in it only increase of happiness to all , and had no scruple in urging him to the utmost .-- She had such a regard for Mr . Knightley , as to think he deserved even her dearest Emma ; and it was in every respect so proper , suitable , and unexceptionable a connexion , and in one respect , one point of the highest importance , so peculiarly eligible , so singularly fortunate , that now it seemed as if Emma could not safely have attached herself to any other creature , and that she had herself been the stupidest of beings in not having thought of it , and wished it long ago .-- How very few of those men in a rank of life to address Emma would have renounced their own home for Hartfield !
She did not wish to speak of the pianoforte , she felt too much in the secret herself , to think the appearance of curiosity or interest fair , and therefore purposely kept at a distance ; but by the others , the subject was almost immediately introduced , and she saw the blush of consciousness with which congratulations were received , the blush of guilt which accompanied the name of " my excellent friend Colonel Campbell ."
It was impossible for her to enter on such a subject ; and yet , after a pause , feeling the necessity of speaking , and having not the smallest wish for a total change , she only deviated so far as to say --
Your telling it will be the greatest act of friendship that can be shewn Marianne .
Mr . John Knightley proved more talkative than his brother .
" Everybody is always supposing that I am not a good walker ; and yet they would not have been pleased , if we had refused to join them .
I would have her understand me .
Miss Fairfax , who had seldom spoken before , except among her own confederates , spoke now .
She must have been in your own circle ; for as you went with Lady Dalrymple , you were in the seats of grandeur , round the orchestra , of course ."
In so large a party it was not necessary that Emma should approach her .
This was the conclusion of the first series of reflection .
Let me plead for my -- present friend I cannot call him , but for my former friend .
They were too much like joy , senseless joy !
-- And from her great , her more than commonly thankful delight towards Mrs . Elton for being there , Emma guessed that there had been a little show of resentment towards Jane , from the vicarage quarter , which was now graciously overcome .-- After a few whispers , indeed , which placed it beyond a guess , Mrs . Elton , speaking louder , said ,
When I yielded , I thought it was to duty , but no duty could be called in aid here .
I think they judge wisely .
Willoughby first rousing himself , broke it thus :
But never did she go without Mr . Woodhouse ' s giving a gentle sigh , and saying , " Ah , poor Miss Taylor !
" I am ,"-- she answered --" I am fatigued ; but it is not the sort of fatigue -- quick walking will refresh me .-- Miss Woodhouse , we all know at times what it is to be wearied in spirits .
Of pride , indeed , there was , perhaps , scarcely enough ; his indifference to a confusion of rank , bordered too much on inelegance of mind .
" Well , I cannot understand it ."
Such a beautiful hind - quarter of pork !
" Yes -- no -- never absolutely .
CHAPTER 12
She saw him not far off .
" He promised to come to me as soon as he could disengage himself from Knightley ; but he and Knightley are shut up together in deep consultation .-- Mr .
" Forgive me , forgive me ," throwing her arms round her sister ' s neck ; " I know you feel for me ; I know what a heart you have ; but yet you are -- you must be happy ; Edward loves you -- what , oh what , can do away such happiness as that ?"
And soon afterwards , " Jane Fairfax is a very charming young woman -- but not even Jane Fairfax is perfect .
Who do you think is here ?-- Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith ; so kind as to call to hear the new pianoforte .
He had no idea of me .
" Grandeur has but little ," said Elinor , " but wealth has much to do with it ."
While either of them protected him and his , Hartfield was safe .-- But Mr . John Knightley must be in London again by the end of the first week in November .
As a daughter , she hoped she was not without a heart .
It was the delay of a great deal of pleasure and parade .
I have spent so many happy months there !
" Think of me to - morrow , my dear Emma , about four o ' clock ," was Mrs . Weston ' s parting injunction ; spoken with some anxiety , and meant only for her .
Jane speaks so distinct !
I have done very little ."
She promised , however , to think of it ; and pretty nearly promised , moreover , to think of it , with the intention of finding it a very good scheme .
How glad they had been to hear papa invite him to stay dinner , how sorry when he said it was quite out of his power , and how glad again when he had promised in reply to papa and mamma ' s farther pressing invitations to come and dine with them on the morrow -- actually on the morrow ; and he had promised it in so pleasant a manner , as if he felt all the motive of their attention just as he ought .
The visit of ceremony was paid and returned ; and Louisa Musgrove was mentioned , and Captain Benwick , too , without even half a smile .
Emma could not regret her having gone to Miss Bates , but she wished she had left her ten minutes earlier ;-- it would have been a great pleasure to talk over Jane Fairfax ' s situation with Mr .
Only let me be told when I may speak out .-- I wonder whether Jane has any suspicion ."
But she had promised to hear him , and her curiosity no less than her honor was engaged .
cried Mrs Clay , not daring , however , to turn her eyes towards Anne .
" Harriet , I will not affect to be in doubt of your meaning .
` Oh !'
The consciousness of having done amiss , had exposed her to a thousand inquietudes , and made her captious and irritable to a degree that must have been -- that had been -- hard for him to bear .
[ Persuasion by Jane Austen 1818 ]
A very friendly shake of the hand , a very earnest " Good - bye ," closed the speech , and the door had soon shut out Frank Churchill .
CHAPTER 23
From this time Captain Wentworth and Anne Elliot were repeatedly in the same circle .
said she , " I get quite anxious about you .
There is my father -- another of my father -- but the idea of sitting for his picture made him so nervous , that I could only take him by stealth ; neither of them very like therefore .
He will be here this evening , I dare say , and then I will give it him back , and some nonsense or other will pass between us , and you shall not be committed .-- Your soft eyes shall chuse their own time for beaming .
He had still a small house in Highbury , where most of his leisure days were spent ; and between useful occupation and the pleasures of society , the next eighteen or twenty years of his life passed cheerfully away .
` My dear ,' said I , ` I shall say you are laid down upon the bed :' but , however , she is not ; she is walking about the room .
" We never shall .
" Great has been the pleasure , I am sure .
You may guess , therefore , that the news he heard from his friend could not be very agreeable , and you may guess what it produced ; the resolution of coming back to Bath as soon as possible , and of fixing himself here for a time , with the view of renewing his former acquaintance , and recovering such a footing in the family as might give him the means of ascertaining the degree of his danger , and of circumventing the lady if he found it material .
though we have suffered dreadfully , we are both quite well now , and as happy as we must always be in one another ' s love .
They must speak of the accident at Lyme .
I must go and comfort mama .
" Do tell me how it first came into your head ."
" I believe she does .
" I am not speaking of its prudence ; merely its probability ."
Emma had not had time even to think of Mr . Elton , and she was so completely surprized that she could not avoid a little start , and a little blush , at the sound .
Soft is the very word for her eye -- of all epithets , the justest that could be given .
My mother is delightfully well ; and Jane caught no cold last night .
Could the knowledge have been extended through her family ?
But one or the other , if not both of them , I must have .
Anne was conscious of not doing it so well as Lady Russell .
Anne was so impressed by the degree of their danger , that she could not excuse herself from trying to make it perceptible to her sister .
He was , at that time , a remarkably fine young man , with a great deal of intelligence , spirit , and brilliancy ; and Anne an extremely pretty girl , with gentleness , modesty , taste , and feeling .
" Perhaps ," said Marianne , " I may consider it with some surprise .
Believe me ," and Elinor spoke it with the truest sincerity , " nothing could be farther from my intention than to give you such an idea .
If it was not for the drawback of her illness -- but I am afraid we must expect to see her grown thin , and looking very poorly .
She was as much convinced of his meaning to gain Anne in time as of his deserving her , and was beginning to calculate the number of weeks which would free him from all the remaining restraints of widowhood , and leave him at liberty to exert his most open powers of pleasing .
Any nonsense will serve .
" That has been a good deal the case , my dear ; but not to the degree you mention .
It seemed too precious an offering for any degree of publicity .
" To be sure I will , if you wish it .
" But , Captain Wentworth ," cried Louisa , " how vexed you must have been when you came to the Asp , to see what an old thing they had given you ."
Only think , Miss Elliot , to my great surprise I met with Mr Elliot in Bath Street .
" I am sure ," replied Elinor , with a smile , " that his dearest friends could not be dissatisfied with such commendation as that .
And how came he not to have settled that matter before this person ' s death ?-- NOW indeed it would be too late to sell it , but a man of Colonel Brandon ' s sense !-- I wonder he should be so improvident in a point of such common , such natural , concern !-- Well , I am convinced that there is a vast deal of inconsistency in almost every human character .
It was horrible to Emma to think how it must sink him in the general opinion , to foresee the smiles , the sneers , the merriment it would prompt at his expense ; the mortification and disdain of his brother , the thousand inconveniences to himself .-- Could it be ?-- No ; it was impossible .
So very obliging of Mr . Frank Churchill !
" Mrs . Churchill is not much in my good graces , as you may suspect -- but this is quite between ourselves .
But a farmer can need none of my help , and is , therefore , in one sense , as much above my notice as in every other he is below it ."
" Well , sir ," said Mrs . Jennings , " and how did it end ?"
He is a most charming young man .
Never better .-- Don ' t I hear another carriage ?-- Who can this be ?-- very likely the worthy Coles .-- Upon my word , this is charming to be standing about among such friends !
said she .--" To chuse to remain here month after month , under privations of every sort !
she was a dear old Asp to me .
Now , as her objection was nothing but her very great dislike of Mrs . Elton , of which Mr . Weston must already be perfectly aware , it was not worth bringing forward again :-- it could not be done without a reproof to him , which would be giving pain to his wife ; and she found herself therefore obliged to consent to an arrangement which she would have done a great deal to avoid ; an arrangement which would probably expose her even to the degradation of being said to be of Mrs . Elton ' s party !
That is what she writes about .
I am sure it will all end well , and there will be no difficulties at all , to what I used to think .
She was stopped by a slight fit of coughing , and Mr . Weston instantly seized the opportunity of going on .
" Dearest Marianne , who but himself ?
We are growing a little too nice .
And in all probability you will see your brother , and whatever may be his faults , or the faults of his wife , when I consider whose son he is , I cannot bear to have you so wholly estranged from each other ."
This was not submitted to by either lady .
The sort of desperate calmness with which this was said , lasted no longer than while she spoke , and was immediately followed by a return of the same excessive affliction .
" Your expenses both in town and country must certainly be considerable ; but your income is a large one ."
Emma , alone with her father , had half her attention wanted by him while he lamented that young people would be in such a hurry to marry -- and to marry strangers too -- and the other half she could give to her own view of the subject .
Has not his behaviour to Marianne and to all of us , for at least the last fortnight , declared that he loved and considered her as his future wife , and that he felt for us the attachment of the nearest relation ?
" My expressions startle you .
She will probably have soon done , and then we shall go home .
He only wanted to aggrandise and enrich himself ; and if Miss Woodhouse of Hartfield , the heiress of thirty thousand pounds , were not quite so easily obtained as he had fancied , he would soon try for Miss Somebody else with twenty , or with ten .
he cried .
Was she out with him today ?"
He would stand to it , cost him what it might ."
" I was with Mr . Cole on business an hour and a half ago .
The theatre or the rooms , where he was most likely to be , were not fashionable enough for the Elliots , whose evening amusements were solely in the elegant stupidity of private parties , in which they were getting more and more engaged ; and Anne , wearied of such a state of stagnation , sick of knowing nothing , and fancying herself stronger because her strength was not tried , was quite impatient for the concert evening .
" That fellow ," said he , indignantly , " thinks of nothing but shewing off his own voice .
" If I understand your brother , he only means so far as your having some thoughts of marrying .
Mrs . Jennings was quite right in what she said .
" No ," said Anne , " I can readily believe all that of my cousin .
" When Miss Smiths and Mr . Eltons get acquainted -- they do indeed -- and really it is strange ; it is out of the common course that what is so evidently , so palpably desirable -- what courts the pre - arrangement of other people , should so immediately shape itself into the proper form .
On that subject poor Miss Bates was very unhappy , and very communicative ; Jane would hardly eat any thing :-- Mr . Perry recommended nourishing food ; but every thing they could command ( and never had any body such good neighbours ) was distasteful .
She was not to see Frank Churchill this morning .
They lived beyond their income , but still it was nothing in comparison of Enscombe : she did not cease to love her husband , but she wanted at once to be the wife of Captain Weston , and Miss Churchill of Enscombe .
She was put down in Camden Place ; and Lady Russell then drove to her own lodgings , in Rivers Street .
But I hope , Miss Woodhouse , that supposing -- that if -- strange as it may appear --.
" Dear , dear Norland !"
You are never sure of a good impression being durable ; everybody may sway it .
" You will see them yet , perhaps , before the morning is gone .
There are one or two , perhaps , ( glancing at Mr . Weston and Harriet ,) whose thoughts I might not be afraid of knowing ."
and so imperfectly have I discharged my trust !"
Every thing tender and charming was to mark their parting ; but still they were to part .
" Oh !
" I am afraid , Miss Marianne ," said Sir John , " you have not been able to take your usual walk to Allenham today ."
Her letter was scarcely finished , when a rap foretold a visitor , and Colonel Brandon was announced .
Considering the very particular friendship between her and Mrs . Dixon , you could hardly have expected her to be excused from accompanying Colonel and Mrs .
" About Jane Fairfax .
" Well , well ; whatever Colonel Brandon may be , Edward is a very lucky man .-- You will not mention the matter to Fanny , however , for though I have broke it to her , and she bears it vastly well ,-- she will not like to hear it much talked of ."
" A bad thing !
And this is the end , you see , of Captain Benwick ' s being supposed to be an admirer of yours .
I will not promise even to equal the elegant terseness of Mrs . Elton , by calling you Mr . K .-- But I will promise ," she added presently , laughing and blushing --" I will promise to call you once by your Christian name .
His son was sent for as soon as his danger was known , and to him Mr . Dashwood recommended , with all the strength and urgency which illness could command , the interest of his mother - in - law and sisters .
" Such weather makes every thing and every body disgusting .
How Anne ' s more rigid requisitions might have been taken is of little consequence .
Only think if anything should happen ?"
Consider from how partial a quarter your information came .
How many a man has committed himself on a short acquaintance , and rued it all the rest of his life !"
How I should like such a house for myself !
Mr . Knightley loves to find fault with me , you know -- in a joke -- it is all a joke .
" But what ," said she after a short silence , " are your views ?
Their propriety , simplicity , and elegance , would make them the safest model for any young woman ."
She , therefore , said no more for some time .
And then , if I could convey to you the glow of his soul when he does see them again ; when , coming back after a twelvemonth ' s absence , perhaps , and obliged to put into another port , he calculates how soon it be possible to get them there , pretending to deceive himself , and saying , ` They cannot be here till such a day ,' but all the while hoping for them twelve hours sooner , and seeing them arrive at last , as if Heaven had given them wings , by many hours sooner still !
Mr Elliot was better to look at than most men , and he had no objection to being seen with him anywhere ."
" I can give you no account of them .
" We are going to Box Hill to - morrow ;-- you will join us .
" Come Colonel ," said Mrs . Jennings , " before you go , do let us know what you are going about ."
It is a sweet place , by all accounts ."
She had no sense of superiority then .
After a short struggle , however , Charles Hayter seemed to quit the field .
cried he , looking eagerly at her , " are you , indeed ?"
She thought of what had just passed with anxiety and distrust .
And yet here are two gentlemen stuck up in it mightily at their ease , and looking about them at the rocks and mountains , as if they were not to be upset the next moment , which they certainly must be .
" How can that be ?
She had never been staying there before , without being struck by it , or without wishing that other Elliots could have her advantage in seeing how unknown , or unconsidered there , were the affairs which at Kellynch Hall were treated as of such general publicity and pervading interest ; yet , with all this experience , she believed she must now submit to feel that another lesson , in the art of knowing our own nothingness beyond our own circle , was become necessary for her ; for certainly , coming as she did , with a heart full of the subject which had been completely occupying both houses in Kellynch for many weeks , she had expected rather more curiosity and sympathy than she found in the separate but very similar remark of Mr and Mrs Musgrove : " So , Miss Anne , Sir Walter and your sister are gone ; and what part of Bath do you think they will settle in ?"
The Musgroves , like their houses , were in a state of alteration , perhaps of improvement .
" Can you trust me with such flatterers ?-- Does my vain spirit ever tell me I am wrong ?"
" Oh !
What the devil does Sir John mean by not having a billiard room in his house ?
But how is your acquaintance to be long supported , under such extraordinary despatch of every subject for discourse ?
With such a confederacy against her -- with a knowledge so intimate of his goodness -- with a conviction of his fond attachment to herself , which at last , though long after it was observable to everybody else -- burst on her -- what could she do ?
A young farmer , whether on horseback or on foot , is the very last sort of person to raise my curiosity .
Edward ' s embarrassment lasted some time , and it ended in an absence of mind still more settled .
Mr . Churchill ' s loss would be dreadful indeed .
How do you all do ?-- Quite well , I am much obliged to you .
Oh !
Mrs . Dashwood did not hear unmoved the vindication of her former favourite .
But I thought , at the time , that you would most likely change your mind when it came to the point .
In general , his voice and manner were studiously calm .
She had good reason to believe that some property of her husband in the West Indies , which had been for many years under a sort of sequestration for the payment of its own incumbrances , might be recoverable by proper measures ; and this property , though not large , would be enough to make her comparatively rich .
Supper was announced .
In that point , however , I undervalued my own magnanimity , as the event declared ; for I went , I saw her , and saw her miserable , and left her miserable -- and left her hoping never to see her again ."
He has broken no faith with me ."
Oh dear , no !
If he had never esteemed my opinion before , he would have thought highly of me then ; and , I dare say , left the house thinking me the best friend and counsellor man ever had .
" Fanny is in her own room , I suppose ," said he :--" I will go to her presently , for I am sure she will not have the least objection in the world to seeing YOU .-- Very far from it , indeed .
She doubted whether she had not transgressed the duty of woman by woman , in betraying her suspicions of Jane Fairfax ' s feelings to Frank Churchill .
She was in good humour with all .
You must have known , that while you were enjoying yourself in Devonshire pursuing fresh schemes , always gay , always happy , she was reduced to the extremest indigence ."
As she joined him , Captain Harville ' s countenance re - assumed the serious , thoughtful expression which seemed its natural character .
Their conversation the preceding evening did not disincline him to seek her again ; and they walked together some time , talking as before of Mr Scott and Lord Byron , and still as unable as before , and as unable as any other two readers , to think exactly alike of the merits of either , till something occasioned an almost general change amongst their party , and instead of Captain Benwick , she had Captain Harville by her side .
And as to smaller - sized rooms than I had been used to , I really could not give it a thought .
But her condemnation of him did not blind her to the impropriety of their having been written at all ; and she was silently grieving over the imprudence which had hazarded such unsolicited proofs of tenderness , not warranted by anything preceding , and most severely condemned by the event , when Marianne , perceiving that she had finished the letters , observed to her that they contained nothing but what any one would have written in the same situation .
Oh yes , Friday or Saturday next .
He had distinguished himself , and early gained the other step in rank , and must now , by successive captures , have made a handsome fortune .
Sometimes one is guided by what they say of themselves , and very frequently by what other people say of them , without giving oneself time to deliberate and judge ."
It amused her to observe that all her friends seemed determined to send her to Delaford ;-- a place , in which , of all others , she would now least chuse to visit , or wish to reside ; for not only was it considered as her future home by her brother and Mrs . Jennings , but even Lucy , when they parted , gave her a pressing invitation to visit her there .
How do you like Bath , Miss Elliot ?
Miss Woodhouse , how ungrateful I have been !"
When the ladies returned to the drawing - room after dinner , Emma found it hardly possible to prevent their making two distinct parties ;-- with so much perseverance in judging and behaving ill did Mrs . Elton engross Jane Fairfax and slight herself .
Seven years would be insufficient to make some people acquainted with each other , and seven days are more than enough for others .
As Frank Churchill ' s arrival had succeeded Mr . Elton ' s engagement in the conversation of Highbury , as the latest interest had entirely borne down the first , so now upon Frank Churchill ' s disappearance , Mr . Elton ' s concerns were assuming the most irresistible form .-- His wedding - day was named .
But how she contrives it without reflecting on the character of her own father , who had himself two wives , I know not .
The longer she considered it , the greater was her sense of its expediency .
She was the youngest of the two daughters of a most affectionate , indulgent father ; and had , in consequence of her sister ' s marriage , been mistress of his house from a very early period .
Mr . Weston , with triumph of a different sort , was confessing that he had known it to be snowing some time , but had not said a word , lest it should make Mr . Woodhouse uncomfortable , and be an excuse for his hurrying away .
" What shall you do !
Oh no !
" Especially when _one_ of those two is such a fanciful , troublesome creature !"
I am only ready whenever you are .
Mr . John Knightley looked as if he did not comprehend the pleasure , but said only , coolly ,
Your kindness almost overpowers me .
A carriage was heard .
Oh !
Charles , my dear ," ( beckoning him to her ), " do ask Captain Wentworth where it was he first met with your poor brother .
Lady Russell had another excellent one at hand , for being extremely glad that Sir Walter and his family were to remove from the country .
The neglect had been visited on the head of the sinner ; for when poor Lady Elliot died herself , no letter of condolence was received at Kellynch , and , consequently , there was but too much reason to apprehend that the Dalrymples considered the relationship as closed .
She had no visible friends but what had been acquired at Highbury , and was now just returned from a long visit in the country to some young ladies who had been at school there with her .
They were gone , she hoped , to be happy , however oddly constructed such happiness might seem ; as for herself , she was left with as many sensations of comfort , as were , perhaps , ever likely to be hers .
" He knew nothing about it , Emma .
I knew that we should either go to the bottom together , or that she would be the making of me ; and I never had two days of foul weather all the time I was at sea in her ; and after taking privateers enough to be very entertaining , I had the good luck in my passage home the next autumn , to fall in with the very French frigate I wanted .
My mother often wonders that I can make it out so well .
Anne longed for the power of representing to them all what they were about , and of pointing out some of the evils they were exposing themselves to .
" To be sure we do ," cried his father ; " Mrs . Bates -- we passed her house -- I saw Miss Bates at the window .
It is a match that must give universal satisfaction .
In a few moments Marianne did the same .
With such an opinion , in confirmation of his own , Mr . Woodhouse hoped to influence every visitor of the newly married pair ; but still the cake was eaten ; and there was no rest for his benevolent nerves till it was all gone .
how infinitely superior !"
" You know her disposition , and may believe how eagerly she would still justify him if she could ."
Till it does come , you know , we women never mean to have anybody .
Captain Harville was a tall , dark man , with a sensible , benevolent countenance ; a little lame ; and from strong features and want of health , looking much older than Captain Wentworth .
-- was a question , however , which did not augur much .
Colonel Brandon , who had a general invitation to the house , was with them almost every day ; he came to look at Marianne and talk to Elinor , who often derived more satisfaction from conversing with him than from any other daily occurrence , but who saw at the same time with much concern his continued regard for her sister .
The child of good fortune !
Short was the time , however , in which that fear could affect her , for within half an hour after Willoughby ' s leaving the house , she was again called down stairs by the sound of another carriage .-- Eager to save her mother from every unnecessary moment ' s horrible suspense , she ran immediately into the hall , and reached the outward door just in time to receive and support her as she entered it .
I am glad I was not a week later then ."
She was prepared to be wet through , fatigued , and frightened ; but the event was still more unfortunate , for they did not go at all .
" But , in spite of all her friends ' urgency , and her own wish of seeing Ireland , Miss Fairfax prefers devoting the time to you and Mrs .
The boy had , with the additional softening claim of a lingering illness of his mother ' s , been the means of a sort of reconciliation ; and Mr . and Mrs . Churchill , having no children of their own , nor any other young creature of equal kindred to care for , offered to take the whole charge of the little Frank soon after her decease .
" M . D ."
That will just do for me , you know .
Does he know that I am in Bath ?"
We owe Mrs . Jennings much more than civility ; and civility of the commonest kind must prevent such a hasty removal as that ."
But to be waiting so long in inaction , and waiting only for evil , had been dreadful .
Emma ' s first resolution was to keep her father from the knowledge of what had passed ,-- aware of the anxiety and alarm it would occasion : but she soon felt that concealment must be impossible .
How are your neighbours at the Great House ?"
Go , and interfere .
Continual engagements at home and abroad , however , supplied all the deficiencies of nature and education ; supported the good spirits of Sir John , and gave exercise to the good breeding of his wife .
Is she said to be amiable ?"
" How you can bear such recollections , is astonishing to me !-- They _will_ sometimes obtrude -- but how you can court them !"
I never heard any county but Surry called so ."
Mr . Woodhouse was quite at ease ; and the seeing him so , with the arrival of the little boys and the philosophic composure of her brother on hearing his fate , removed the chief of even Emma ' s vexation .
How very odd !"
` It is only Mrs . Cole ,' said I , ` depend upon it .
You need not be prompted to write with the appearance of sorrow for his disappointment ."
She had hoped better things from their high ideas of their own situation in life , and was reduced to form a wish which she had never foreseen ; a wish that they had more pride ; for " our cousins Lady Dalrymple and Miss Carteret ;" " our cousins , the Dalrymples ," sounded in her ears all day long .
I want you to call me something else , but I do not know what ."
and Emma received a smile which seemed to say , " These are my own concerns .
added Sir John .
Her parting look was grateful -- and her parting words , " Oh !
But there is one comfort , my dear Miss Marianne ; he is not the only young man in the world worth having ; and with your pretty face you will never want admirers .
I believe I have been wrong in saying so much , but I hardly know what to do , and on your prudence I have the strongest dependence .
What was unwholesome to him he regarded as unfit for any body ; and he had , therefore , earnestly tried to dissuade them from having any wedding - cake at all , and when that proved vain , as earnestly tried to prevent any body ' s eating it .
A hundred a year would make them all perfectly comfortable ."
Emma was more than half in hopes of Mr . Elton ' s having dropt a hint .
He had called in Camden Place ; had called a second time , a third ; had been pointedly attentive .
" Yes ," cried he in the same eager tone , " with all and every thing belonging to it ;-- in no one convenience or INconvenience about it , should the least variation be perceptible .
" I wish to assure you both ," said she , " that I see every thing -- as you can desire me to do ."
Mrs . Churchill will not be second to any lady in the land for "--
They were visited on their first settling by almost all their relations and friends .
Anne smiled and said ,
You may believe me , Mrs . Weston .
I could not bear it for Emma !-- Emma is not strong .
my dear ,' says I , ' it is nothing in the world , but the red gum --' and nurse said just the same .
Jane , do you know I always fancy Mr . Dixon like Mr . John Knightley .
There the news must follow him , but who was to tell it ?
Emma thought first of herself , and then of Harriet .
He had given her some hints of it the last spring in town ; he had gone so far even as to say , " Can we retrench ?
Yet she bore it with so much composure , she seemed scarcely to notice it .
said Emma , as soon as she could speak .
" Ah !
Before she had committed herself by any public profession of eternal friendship for Jane Fairfax , or done more towards a recantation of past prejudices and errors , than saying to Mr . Knightley , " She certainly is handsome ; she is better than handsome !"
what was his name ?
It was all said very gracefully , and the cards with which she had provided herself , the " Miss Elliot at home ," were laid on the table , with a courteous , comprehensive smile to all , and one smile and one card more decidedly for Captain Wentworth .
" I have escaped ; and that I should escape , may be a matter of grateful wonder to you and myself .
The " How d ' ye do ' s " were quiet and constrained on each side .
A bed on the floor in Louisa ' s room would be sufficient for her , if Mrs Harville would but think so ."
All I have ever attempted to influence has been the behaviour .
Elinor agreed to it all , for she did not think he deserved the compliment of rational opposition .
" Ah !
" It is impossible that Emma should not miss such a companion ," said Mr . Knightley .
And as I looked at her , though I never saw her appear to more advantage , it struck me that she was heated , and would therefore be particularly liable to take cold .
They had taken out a young dog , who had spoilt their sport , and sent them back early .
After waiting a moment , as if to be sure she intended to say no more , he replied ,
CHAPTER 22
" Emma , my love , you said that this circumstance would not now make you unhappy ; but I am afraid it gives you more pain than you expected .
But poor Mrs Clay who , with all her merits , can never have been reckoned tolerably pretty , I really think poor Mrs Clay may be staying here in perfect safety .
The carriage was at the door ready to take my poor cousins away , and they were just stepping in as he came off ; poor Lucy in such a condition , he says , she could hardly walk ; and Nancy , she was almost as bad .
He was not calm ; his spirits were evidently fluttered ; there was restlessness about him .
But you have not an idea of what is requisite in situations directly opposite to your own .
That brother had been long removed from the country and being a sensible man , and , moreover , a single man at the time , she had a fond dependence on no human creature ' s having heard of it from him .
He was not in his best spirits , but seemed trying to improve them ; and , at last , made himself talk nonsense very agreeably .
They were not the same , but they were , perhaps , equally good .
You will not be hysterical again .
" Oh !
His lameness prevented him from taking much exercise ; but a mind of usefulness and ingenuity seemed to furnish him with constant employment within .
Though neither Henrietta , nor Louisa , nor Charles Hayter , nor Captain Wentworth were there , the room presented as strong a contrast as could be wished to the last state she had seen it in .
no , nothing should tempt me to leave her .
But though this behaviour assured Elinor that the conviction of this guilt WAS carried home to her mind , though she saw with satisfaction the effect of it , in her no longer avoiding Colonel Brandon when he called , in her speaking to him , even voluntarily speaking , with a kind of compassionate respect , and though she saw her spirits less violently irritated than before , she did not see her less wretched .
And ( raising his voice still more ) I do not see why Miss Fairfax should not be mentioned too .
MY gratitude will be insured immediately by any information tending to that end , and HERS must be gained by it in time .
The service he rendered you was enough to warm your heart ."
" Do come , Anne " cried Mary , " come and look yourself .
Then there would always be company for them .
He was astonished , indeed , but his character and general conduct must refute it .
" Me !"
-- she cried , with great agitation .
Anne felt that she did not belong to the conversation , and yet , as Captain Harville seemed thoughtful and not disposed to talk , she could not avoid hearing many undesirable particulars ; such as , " how Mr Musgrove and my brother Hayter had met again and again to talk it over ; what my brother Hayter had said one day , and what Mr Musgrove had proposed the next , and what had occurred to my sister Hayter , and what the young people had wished , and what I said at first I never could consent to , but was afterwards persuaded to think might do very well ," and a great deal in the same style of open - hearted communication : minutiae which , even with every advantage of taste and delicacy , which good Mrs Musgrove could not give , could be properly interesting only to the principals .
I made the match , you know , four years ago ; and to have it take place , and be proved in the right , when so many people said Mr . Weston would never marry again , may comfort me for any thing ."
Decidedly , I think , a very gentleman - like man ."
It would be but a new creation , however , and I never think much of your new creations ."
" How odd , indeed !"
This was drawn at the Cape .
The invitation was refused , and by a verbal message .
He might observe that it was so .
Was his engagement to Lucy an engagement of the heart ?
The reasons for this alteration were at the same time related , and they were such as to make further entreaty on his side impossible .
That ' s very like .
After a short silence on both sides , Mrs . Jennings , with all her natural hilarity , burst forth again .
He was immediately qualifying himself to form an opinion , by giving her very proper attention , after the introduction had passed .
--
Not a moment was lost in delay of any kind .
One morning , about this time Charles Musgrove and Captain Wentworth being gone a - shooting together , as the sisters in the Cottage were sitting quietly at work , they were visited at the window by the sisters from the Mansion - house .
To her dress and appearance she was grown so perfectly indifferent , as not to bestow half the consideration on it , during the whole of her toilet , which it received from Miss Steele in the first five minutes of their being together , when it was finished .
Without considering that it was not in her mother ' s plan to keep any horse , that if she were to alter her resolution in favour of this gift , she must buy another for the servant , and keep a servant to ride it , and after all , build a stable to receive them , she had accepted the present without hesitation , and told her sister of it in raptures .
She meant to take her in the carriage , leave her at the Abbey Mill , while she drove a little farther , and call for her again so soon , as to allow no time for insidious applications or dangerous recurrences to the past , and give the most decided proof of what degree of intimacy was chosen for the future .
" Oh !
See the consequence of keeping you company !-- What do you say to it ?"
" Of ONE thing , my dear sister ," kindly taking her hand , and speaking in an awful whisper ,--" I may assure you ;-- and I WILL do it , because I know it must gratify you .
Mrs Clay has been using it at my recommendation , and you see what it has done for her .
Their actual speed , heightened by some dread of the conclusion , made the road appear but half as long as on the day before .
" Nay , she has always been a first favourite with him , as you very well know ."
As she ceased , the entrance door opened again , and the very party appeared for whom they were waiting .
And Lucy perhaps at first might think only of procuring his good offices in my favour .
with all her reasoning , she found , that to retentive feelings eight years may be little more than nothing .
-- cried Elinor , more and more at a loss to understand what he would be at .
Well , I wish them happy with all my heart .
Her exertions did not stop here ; for she soon afterwards felt herself so heroically disposed as to determine , under pretence of fetching Marianne , to leave the others by themselves ; and she really did it , and THAT in the handsomest manner , for she loitered away several minutes on the landing - place , with the most high - minded fortitude , before she went to her sister .
CHAPTER III
She had no such object for her lingering thoughts to fix on , she left no creature behind , from whom it would give her a moment ' s regret to be divided for ever , she was pleased to be free herself from the persecution of Lucy ' s friendship , she was grateful for bringing her sister away unseen by Willoughby since his marriage , and she looked forward with hope to what a few months of tranquility at Barton might do towards restoring Marianne ' s peace of mind , and confirming her own .
" His regard for her , infinitely surpassing anything that Willoughby ever felt or feigned , as much more warm , as more sincere or constant -- which ever we are to call it -- has subsisted through all the knowledge of dear Marianne ' s unhappy prepossession for that worthless young man !-- and without selfishness -- without encouraging a hope !-- could he have seen her happy with another -- Such a noble mind !-- such openness , such sincerity !-- no one can be deceived in HIM ."
Emma felt that Mrs . Weston was giving her a momentary glance ; and she was herself struck by his warmth .
At the end of that period , Lady Russell ' s politeness could repose no longer , and the fainter self - threatenings of the past became in a decided tone , " I must call on Mrs Croft ; I really must call upon her soon .
Miss Woodhouse , I am quite concerned , I am sure you hit your foot .
" Oh !
They met with the utmost friendliness .
There is a sort of domestic enjoyment to be known even in a crowd , and this you had .
His pleasure in music , though it amounted not to that ecstatic delight which alone could sympathize with her own , was estimable when contrasted against the horrible insensibility of the others ; and she was reasonable enough to allow that a man of five and thirty might well have outlived all acuteness of feeling and every exquisite power of enjoyment .
Did you ever see their equals ?
You are very kind .
It would be enough to make them completely easy .
" Marianne ' s note , by assuring me that I was still as dear to her as in former days , that in spite of the many , many weeks we had been separated , she was as constant in her own feelings , and as full of faith in the constancy of mine as ever , awakened all my remorse .
Absolutely insufferable !
I never saw such a likeness in my life .
On every formal visit a child ought to be of the party , by way of provision for discourse .
They knew not each other ' s opinion , either its constancy or its change , on the one leading point of Anne ' s conduct , for the subject was never alluded to ; but Anne , at seven - and - twenty , thought very differently from what she had been made to think at nineteen .
The letter , with a direction hardly legible , to " Miss A . E .--," was evidently the one which he had been folding so hastily .
She then went away , walking on tiptoe out of the room , as if she supposed her young friend ' s affliction could be increased by noise .
He might even have Harriet in his thoughts at the moment ; who could say ?
They were rapidly forming words for each other , or for any body else who would be puzzled .
It was a struggle between propriety and vanity ; but vanity got the better , and then Elizabeth was happy again .
It was enough for her to feel .
I could not have stood it .
The day came , the party were punctually assembled , and Mr . John Knightley seemed early to devote himself to the business of being agreeable .
" I have not the smallest objection on that account ," replied Anne .
" I am ready , if the others are ."
Every report agreed in Captain Wentworth ' s appearing fixed in Lyme .
She understood it all ; and as far as her mind could disengage itself from the injustice and selfishness of angry feelings , she acknowledged that Jane Fairfax would have neither elevation nor happiness beyond her desert .
La !
This , though late , and reluctant , and ungracious , was yet better than nothing , and her spirits improved .
" Oh !
Tell your aunt , little Emma , that she ought to set you a better example than to be renewing old grievances , and that if she were not wrong before , she is now ."
The error has been all my own ; and I do assure you that , with all the excuse that present circumstances may appear to give , I shall yet dread making the story known to Colonel Campbell .'"
It would have been strange if I had not gone ."
I had not thought seriously on this subject before .
said Emma in a whisper .
But perhaps you will say , these were all written by men ."
I was hers in honour if she wished it .
As such , however , they were treated by her with quiet civility ; and by her husband with as much kindness as he could feel towards anybody beyond himself , his wife , and their child .
They visited in Laura Place , they had the cards of Dowager Viscountess Dalrymple , and the Honourable Miss Carteret , to be arranged wherever they might be most visible : and " Our cousins in Laura Place ,"--" Our cousin , Lady Dalrymple and Miss Carteret ," were talked of to everybody .
I did not know my danger till the danger was removed ; but with such feelings as these reflections gave me , I wonder at my recovery ,-- wonder that the very eagerness of my desire to live , to have time for atonement to my God , and to you all , did not kill me at once .
But " no , she would go down ; she could bear it very well , and the bustle about her would be less ."
" It appears to me the most desirable arrangement in the world ."
But as they drew towards the end of it , their interest in the appearance of a country which they were to inhabit overcame their dejection , and a view of Barton Valley as they entered it gave them cheerfulness .
You are your mother ' s self in countenance and disposition ; and if I might be allowed to fancy you such as she was , in situation and name , and home , presiding and blessing in the same spot , and only superior to her in being more highly valued !
This was felt to be a considerable amendment ; and though they all met at the Great House at rather an early breakfast hour , and set off very punctually , it was so much past noon before the two carriages , Mr Musgrove ' s coach containing the four ladies , and Charles ' s curricle , in which he drove Captain Wentworth , were descending the long hill into Lyme , and entering upon the still steeper street of the town itself , that it was very evident they would not have more than time for looking about them , before the light and warmth of the day were gone .
" What a very great pleasure it will be to you !
And at Lyme too , only seventeen miles off , he would be near enough to hear , if people thought there was anything to complain of ."
I should certainly have called at Hartfield , had you failed to come ."
So up he flew directly , and a terrible scene took place , for Lucy was come to them by that time , little dreaming what was going on .
Emma was not required , by any subsequent discovery , to retract her ill opinion of Mrs . Elton .
The evening ended with dancing .
No time was to be lost in undeceiving her , in making her acquainted with the real truth , and in endeavouring to bring her to hear it talked of by others , without betraying that she felt any uneasiness for her sister , or any resentment against Edward .
" Ah !
She paused over it , while Harriet stood anxiously watching for her opinion , with a " Well , well ," and was at last forced to add , " Is it a good letter ?
It was not so yesterday , I think .
" Was he handsome ?"
" For shame , Emma !
She was , in fact , beginning very much to wonder that she had ever thought him pleasing at all ; and his sight was so inseparably connected with some very disagreeable feelings , that , except in a moral light , as a penance , a lesson , a source of profitable humiliation to her own mind , she would have been thankful to be assured of never seeing him again .
To speak , she was sure would be to betray a most unreasonable degree of happiness .
It cannot be doubted that Sir Walter and Elizabeth were shocked and mortified by the loss of their companion , and the discovery of their deception in her .
Captain Harville has no thought but of going ."
" I saw you first in February .
When she could let her attention take its natural course again , she found the Miss Musgroves just fetching the Navy List ( their own navy list , the first that had ever been at Uppercross ), and sitting down together to pore over it , with the professed view of finding out the ships that Captain Wentworth had commanded .
I am sure I do not know who is not ."
You had made your own choice .
She had no dread of these two months .
And I must say , I think she was used very hardly ; for your sister scolded like any fury , and soon drove her into a fainting fit .
But ah !
I had no hope of interfering with success ; and sometimes I thought your sister ' s influence might yet reclaim him .
" No , ma ' am -- the horses were just coming out , but I could not bide any longer ; I was afraid of being late ."
But I do not think it is at all a likely thing for him to do .
Yes , I have one other comfort in his picture , but poor Edward has not even THAT .
Charles " had never seen a pleasanter man in his life ; and from what he had once heard Captain Wentworth himself say , was very sure that he had not made less than twenty thousand pounds by the war .
" Oh !
With mixed feelings , she seated herself at a little distance from the numbers round the instrument , to listen .
" Such ," said Colonel Brandon , after a pause , " has been the unhappy resemblance between the fate of mother and daughter !
Natural enough !-- his own mind full of intrigue , that he should suspect it in others .-- Mystery ; Finesse -- how they pervert the understanding !
" You may depend upon me ," said she .
Good Heavens !-- What can be to be _broke_ to me , that does not relate to one of that family ?"
In his marrying such a woman therefore there would be nothing unsuitable .
yes , I must be there ; I could not refuse ; and I will keep as much awake as I can ; but I would rather be at home , looking over William Larkins ' s week ' s account ; much rather , I confess .-- Pleasure in seeing dancing !-- not I , indeed -- I never look at it -- I do not know who does .-- Fine dancing , I believe , like virtue , must be its own reward .
" Whatever you say is always right ," cried Harriet , " and therefore I suppose , and believe , and hope it must be so ; but otherwise I could not have imagined it .
" I have no doubt of it ."
A submissive spirit might be patient , a strong understanding would supply resolution , but here was something more ; here was that elasticity of mind , that disposition to be comforted , that power of turning readily from evil to good , and of finding employment which carried her out of herself , which was from nature alone .
Mr . Weston ' s sanguine temper was a blessing on all his upright and honourable exertions ; but Mr . Weston earned every present comfort before he endeavoured to gain it .-- Very true ; he did not come till Miss Fairfax was here ."
The disgrace of his first marriage might , perhaps , as there was no reason to suppose it perpetuated by offspring , have been got over , had he not done worse ; but he had , as by the accustomary intervention of kind friends , they had been informed , spoken most disrespectfully of them all , most slightingly and contemptuously of the very blood he belonged to , and the honours which were hereafter to be his own .
" That is very true , and , therefore , I do not know whether , upon the whole , it would not be more advisable to do something for their mother while she lives , rather than for them -- something of the annuity kind I mean .-- My sisters would feel the good effects of it as well as herself .
Anne was one of the few who did not choose to move .
Nothing escaped HER minute observation and general curiosity ; she saw every thing , and asked every thing ; was never easy till she knew the price of every part of Marianne ' s dress ; could have guessed the number of her gowns altogether with better judgment than Marianne herself , and was not without hopes of finding out before they parted , how much her washing cost per week , and how much she had every year to spend upon herself .
But now , another occupation and solicitude of mind was beginning to be added to these .
I acknowledge that her situation and her character ought to have been respected by me .
Knightley .--" Emma , that I fear is a word -- No , I have no wish -- Stay , yes , why should I hesitate ?-- I have gone too far already for concealment .-- Emma , I accept your offer -- Extraordinary as it may seem , I accept it , and refer myself to you as a friend .-- Tell me , then , have I no chance of ever succeeding ?"
Captain Wentworth looked round at her instantly in a way which shewed his noticing of it .
But they learnt , on enquiry , that its possessor , an elderly lady of very good character , was unfortunately too infirm to mix with the world , and never stirred from home .
Cole ."
I should not have supposed that you could have found anything in Lyme to inspire such a feeling .
They separated too much into parties .
He had more than the ordinary triumph of accepted love to swell his heart , and raise his spirits .
Could there have been any unpleasant glances ?
I remember saying to myself , ` Even Emma , with all her partiality for Harriet , will think this a good match .'"
I always say a woman cannot have too many resources -- and I feel very thankful that I have so many myself as to be quite independent of society ."
" You consider the matter ," said Elinor , " exactly as a good mind and a sound understanding must consider it ; and I dare say you perceive , as well as myself , not only in this , but in many other circumstances , reason enough to be convinced that your marriage must have involved you in many certain troubles and disappointments , in which you would have been poorly supported by an affection , on his side , much less certain .
Marianne had been two or three days at home , before the weather was fine enough for an invalid like herself to venture out .
If Mrs Clay were a very beautiful woman , I grant you , it might be wrong to have her so much with me ; not that anything in the world , I am sure , would induce my father to make a degrading match , but he might be rendered unhappy .
Emma felt the bad taste of her friend , but let it pass with a " very true ; and it would be a small consolation to her , for the clownish manner which might be offending her every hour of the day , to know that her husband could write a good letter ."
" I have heard ," said he , with great compassion , " of the injustice your friend Mr . Ferrars has suffered from his family ; for if I understand the matter right , he has been entirely cast off by them for persevering in his engagement with a very deserving young woman .-- Have I been rightly informed ?-- Is it so ?--"
At least , however , I cannot be worse off than I should have been , if the other had been the person ; and now -- it _is_ possible --"
" The lady , I suppose , has no choice in the affair ."
" Bless me !
When Elinor had ceased to rejoice in the dryness of the season , a very awful pause took place .
The aunt was as tiresome as ever ; more tiresome , because anxiety for her health was now added to admiration of her powers ; and they had to listen to the description of exactly how little bread and butter she ate for breakfast , and how small a slice of mutton for dinner , as well as to see exhibitions of new caps and new workbags for her mother and herself ; and Jane ' s offences rose again .
The park would be open to him of course , and few navy officers , or men of any other description , can have had such a range ; but what restrictions I might impose on the use of the pleasure - grounds , is another thing .
" What is this ?-- What is this ?"
The kindness , the unceasing kindness of Mrs . Jennings , I had repaid with ungrateful contempt .
Any other situation would have been much less in character .
Having now said enough to make his poverty clear , and to do away the necessity of buying a pair of ear - rings for each of his sisters , in his next visit at Gray ' s his thoughts took a cheerfuller turn , and he began to congratulate Elinor on having such a friend as Mrs . Jennings .
But now for Louisa .
You can borrow Mrs . Cole ' s .
But I am very glad to find it was only my own fancy , and that you really do not blame me .
She comforted her father better than she could comfort herself , by representing that though he certainly would make them nine , yet he always said so little , that the increase of noise would be very immaterial .
We are very proud of the children , are not we , papa ?
Marianne looked as if she had no doubt on that point .
He would either have gloried in the achievement , or been ashamed of it .
if you knew how much I love every thing that is decided and open !-- Good - bye , good - bye ."
" Do let us have the pleasure of taking you home .
They were called on to share in the awkwardness of a rather long interval between the courses , and obliged to be as formal and as orderly as the others ; but when the table was again safely covered , when every corner dish was placed exactly right , and occupation and ease were generally restored , Emma said ,
" I do not know what I could imagine , but I confess that I have seldom seen a face or figure more pleasing to me than hers .
She could consult with her brother , could receive her sister - in - law on her arrival , and treat her with proper attention ; and could strive to rouse her mother to similar exertion , and encourage her to similar forbearance .
" Yes , yes , I see you are .
But the sight of Mr . Knightley among the most attentive , soon drew away half Emma ' s mind ; and she fell into a train of thinking on the subject of Mrs . Weston ' s suspicions , to which the sweet sounds of the united voices gave only momentary interruptions .
I used to be quite angry with Selina ; but really I begin now to comprehend that a married woman has many things to call her attention .
Tell me that it is all absolutely resolved on , that any attempt , that in short concealment , if concealment be possible , is all that remains ."
A most suitable connection everybody must consider it , but I think it might be a very happy one ."
Poor old Sir Archibald !
Her attachment and regrets had , for a long time , clouded every enjoyment of youth , and an early loss of bloom and spirits had been their lasting effect .
What right had he to endeavour to please , as he certainly did -- to distinguish any one young woman with persevering attention , as he certainly did -- while he really belonged to another ?-- How could he tell what mischief he might be doing ?-- How could he tell that he might not be making me in love with him ?-- very wrong , very wrong indeed ."
She paused a moment to recover from the emotion of hearing herself so spoken of .
Their dress had every advantage , their faces were rather pretty , their spirits extremely good , their manner unembarrassed and pleasant ; they were of consequence at home , and favourites abroad .
How was such jealousy to be quieted ?
She must have delighted the Coles -- worthy people , who deserved to be made happy !-- And left a name behind her that would not soon die away .
They all looked their assent ; it seemed too awful a moment for speech .
" Well , I am very glad indeed : but I always thought you would have it ; I always thought you sure .
She got her to Hartfield , and shewed her the most unvarying kindness , striving to occupy and amuse her , and by books and conversation , to drive Mr . Elton from her thoughts .
I know you will not be sorry to be off .
Ah !
" I confess ," replied Elinor , " that while I am at Barton Park , I never think of tame and quiet children with any abhorrence ."
" Civil !-- Did you see nothing but only civility ?-- I saw a vast deal more .
cried Harriet indignantly .--" Oh !
But still he went on measuring , and still he ended with ,
I am amazed that you should think of such a thing ."
Anne entered it with a sinking heart , anticipating an imprisonment of many months , and anxiously saying to herself , " Oh !
Perry says that colds have been very general , but not so heavy as he has very often known them in November .
She was forced to acknowledge that she could do no good , yet was still unwilling to be away , till , touched by the thought of her father and mother , she gave it up ; she consented , she was anxious to be at home .
He must and does love her I am sure ."
no doubt she had been suffering a great deal : more than any body had ever supposed -- and continual pain would try the temper .
such a deceitful dog !
Elinor did not quite understand the beginning of Mrs . Jennings ' s speech , neither did she think it worth inquiring into ; and therefore only replied to its conclusion .
Towards the end of Jane ' s second song , her voice grew thick .
" Exactly like father and son !
_She_ was a little occupied in weighing her own feelings , and trying to understand the degree of her agitation , which she rather thought was considerable .
" Well -- I am so glad you do .
Anne was obliged to turn away , to rise , to walk to a distant table , and , leaning there in pretended employment , try to subdue the feelings this picture excited .
" He and I should differ very little in our estimation of the two ," interrupted she , with a sort of serious smile --" much less , perhaps , than he is aware of , if we could enter without ceremony or reserve on the subject ."
I wish -- I heartily wish it had never been .
I was never more astonished .
I have been making discoveries and forming plans , just like yourself , and I must tell them while the idea is fresh .
She had already repeated her own history to Elinor three or four times ; and had Elinor ' s memory been equal to her means of improvement , she might have known very early in their acquaintance all the particulars of Mr . Jenning ' s last illness , and what he said to his wife a few minutes before he died .
It would be the natural result of your affection for her .
Anne saw the misery of such feelings .
They had sung together once or twice , it appeared , at Weymouth .
Elinor had often wished for an opportunity of attempting to weaken her mother ' s dependence on the attachment of Edward and herself , that the shock might be less when the whole truth were revealed , and now on this attack , though almost hopeless of success , she forced herself to begin her design by saying , as calmly as she could , " I like Edward Ferrars very much , and shall always be glad to see him ; but as to the rest of the family , it is a matter of perfect indifference to me , whether I am ever known to them or not ."
Can you imagine any thing nearer perfect beauty than Emma altogether -- face and figure ?"
She is an excellent housemaid , and works very well at her needle .
I honour that part of the attention particularly ; it shews it to have been so thoroughly from the heart .
" These would have been all my friends ," was her thought ; and she had to struggle against a great tendency to lowness .
Lucy , who was hardly less anxious to please one parent than the other , thought the boys were both remarkably tall for their age , and could not conceive that there could be the smallest difference in the world between them ; and Miss Steele , with yet greater address gave it , as fast as she could , in favour of each .
I wish we had been aware in time , who it was , that he might have been introduced to us .
It had not been possible for him to spend less ; he had done nothing but what Sir Walter Elliot was imperiously called on to do ; but blameless as he was , he was not only growing dreadfully in debt , but was hearing of it so often , that it became vain to attempt concealing it longer , even partially , from his daughter .
But that was not enough ; for when people are determined on a mode of conduct which they know to be wrong , they feel injured by the expectation of any thing better from them .
" I think , Harriet , since your acquaintance with us , you have been repeatedly in the company of some such very real gentlemen , that you must yourself be struck with the difference in Mr . Martin .
Thank Heaven !
In the present instance , this last - arrived lady allowed her fancy to so far outrun truth and probability , that on merely hearing the name of the Miss Dashwoods , and understanding them to be Mr . Dashwood ' s sisters , she immediately concluded them to be staying in Harley Street ; and this misconstruction produced within a day or two afterwards , cards of invitation for them as well as for their brother and sister , to a small musical party at her house .
how easy for those , who have no sorrow of their own to talk of exertion !
Her own attachment had really subsided into a mere nothing ; it was not worth thinking of ;-- but if he , who had undoubtedly been always so much the most in love of the two , were to be returning with the same warmth of sentiment which he had taken away , it would be very distressing .
And you may say , that I mean to call upon her soon .
" Did he come from your uncle ' s , then , when he visited us ?"
Then , if you please , you shall send it all to Mrs . Goddard ' s -- I do not know -- No , I think , Miss Woodhouse , I may just as well have it sent to Hartfield , and take it home with me at night .
" At Delaford , she will be within an easy distance of me ," added Mrs . Dashwood , " even if I remain at Barton ; and in all probability ,-- for I hear it is a large village ,-- indeed there certainly MUST be some small house or cottage close by , that would suit us quite as well as our present situation ."
Weston .-- So it proved ;-- for when happily released from Mr . Elton , and seated by Mr . Weston , at dinner , he made use of the very first interval in the cares of hospitality , the very first leisure from the saddle of mutton , to say to her ,
I am sorry for _her_ .
I wish nature had made such hearts as yours more common , but I have lived three - and - twenty years in the world , and have seen none like it .
But he was neither fitted by abilities nor disposition to answer the wishes of his mother and sister , who longed to see him distinguished -- as -- they hardly knew what .
If he should rise to any very great honours !
She will never submit to any thing requiring industry and patience , and a subjection of the fancy to the understanding .
To treat her with unkindness , to speak of her slightingly is no atonement to Marianne -- nor can I suppose it a relief to your own conscience ."
" Six years hence !
One cannot resolve upon them in a hurry .
But the plan which had arisen on the sacrifice of this , he trusted his dearest Emma would not find in any respect objectionable ; it was , that he should be received at Hartfield ; that so long as her father ' s happiness in other words his life -- required Hartfield to continue her home , it should be his likewise .
" Perhaps I intended you to say so , but I meant self - command .
poor man !
CHAPTER 5
Martin !"
But now I seem to feel that I may deserve him ; and that if he does chuse me , it will not be any thing so very wonderful ."
" Ah !"
The Miss Steeles removed to Harley Street , and all that reached Elinor of their influence there , strengthened her expectation of the event .
The son looked convinced .
Mrs . Jennings , though forced , on examination , to acknowledge a temporary revival , tried to keep her young friend from indulging a thought of its continuance ;-- and Elinor , conning over every injunction of distrust , told herself likewise not to hope .
She could not enter the house again , could not be in the same room to which she had with such vain artifice retreated three months ago , to lace up her boot , without _recollecting_ .
" Yes ; and the set of breakfast china is twice as handsome as what belongs to this house .
She believed the regard to be mutual ; but she required greater certainty of it to make Marianne ' s conviction of their attachment agreeable to her .
There must be ample room in it for every real comfort .
Lady Middleton piqued herself upon the elegance of her table , and of all her domestic arrangements ; and from this kind of vanity was her greatest enjoyment in any of their parties .
Are you , indeed , going there ?
But she had not been there two minutes when she found that Harriet ' s habits of dependence and imitation were bringing her up too , and that , in short , they would both be soon after her .
Anne mentioned the glimpses she had had of him at Lyme , but without being much attended to .
Elinor , startled by his manner , looked at him anxiously , saying ,
You have already ascertained Mr . Willoughby ' s opinion in almost every matter of importance .
and it will not be very long , I hope , before that becomes the acknowledgment of more than your reason .-- Fortunate that your affections were not farther entangled !-- I could never , I confess , from your manners , assure myself as to the degree of what you felt -- I could only be certain that there was a preference -- and a preference which I never believed him to deserve .-- He is a disgrace to the name of man .-- And is he to be rewarded with that sweet young woman ?-- Jane , Jane , you will be a miserable creature ."
Emma divined what every body present must be thinking .
" I have no conception whom you can mean , Shepherd ; I remember no gentleman resident at Monkford since the time of old Governor Trent ."
You are very kind to bring me these interesting particulars .
" Yes ; I did not see them myself , but I heard Mr Elliot say they were in the room ."
Then taking a small miniature from her pocket , she added , " To prevent the possibility of mistake , be so good as to look at this face .
Know your own happiness .
Forty ?"
But , however , we may have it all over in the evening ; for we shall be quite alone .
" You mean Mr Wentworth , I suppose ?"
" I dare say your apologies were accepted , sir .
" Now he has got my letter ," said she softly .
Henrietta looked a little ashamed , but very well pleased ;-- Charles Hayter exceedingly happy : and they were devoted to each other almost from the first instant of their all setting forward for Uppercross .
I will do my best .
If we feel for the wretched , enough to do all we can for them , the rest is empty sympathy , only distressing to ourselves ."
And I am so glad your sister is going to be well married !
She looked instinctively at Lady Russell ; but not from any mad idea of her recognising him so soon as she did herself .
I was young once , but I never was very handsome -- worse luck for me .
" I never heard any thing of the kind hinted at before , I assure you ," said Elinor .
Elinor could not help smiling at this display of indifference towards the manners of a person , to whom she had often had difficulty in persuading Marianne to behave with tolerable politeness ; and resolved within herself , that if her sister persisted in going , she would go likewise , as she did not think it proper that Marianne should be left to the sole guidance of her own judgment , or that Mrs . Jennings should be abandoned to the mercy of Marianne for all the comfort of her domestic hours .
I am very little able -- Have you a chair , ma ' am ?
How languid their conversation the last evening of their being together !
Ay , to be sure , he must be ordained in readiness ; and I am very glad to find things are so forward between you .
She felt all the force of that comparison ; but not as her sister had hoped , to urge her to exertion now ; she felt it with all the pain of continual self - reproach , regretted most bitterly that she had never exerted herself before ; but it brought only the torture of penitence , without the hope of amendment .
Late hours do not agree with us .
" Why , I hope not that .
" When you have seen more of this country , I am afraid you will think you have overrated Hartfield .
Edward made no answer ; but when she had turned away her head , gave her a look so serious , so earnest , so uncheerful , as seemed to say , that he might hereafter wish the distance between the parsonage and the mansion - house much greater .
The sympathy and good - will excited towards Captain Benwick was very great .
" You know him then ," said Mrs . Dashwood .
She had frequently thought -- especially since his father ' s marriage with Miss Taylor -- that if she _were_ to marry , he was the very person to suit her in age , character and condition .
No second attachment , the only thoroughly natural , happy , and sufficient cure , at her time of life , had been possible to the nice tone of her mind , the fastidiousness of her taste , in the small limits of the society around them .
The worn - out past was sunk in the freshness of what was coming ; and in the rapidity of half a moment ' s thought , she hoped Mr . Elton would now be talked of no more .
You and Mr . Elton are by situation called together ; you belong to one another by every circumstance of your respective homes .
" Do not talk to me of my wife ," said he with a heavy sigh .-- " She does not deserve your compassion .-- She knew I had no regard for her when we married .-- Well , married we were , and came down to Combe Magna to be happy , and afterwards returned to town to be gay .-- And now do you pity me , Miss Dashwood ?-- or have I said all this to no purpose ?-- Am I -- be it only one degree -- am I less guilty in your opinion than I was before ?-- My intentions were not always wrong .
for myself , I protest I must be excused ," said Mrs . Elton ; " _I_ really cannot attempt -- I am not at all fond of the sort of thing .
He shook his head and laughed .--" I cannot separate Miss Fairfax and her complexion ."
.
Mary had no feelings to make her respect her sister ' s in a common way , but she was perfectly unsuspicious of being inflicting any peculiar wound .
They met Mr . Martin the very next day , as they were walking on the Donwell road .
" You are a very warm friend to Mr . Martin ; but , as I said before , are unjust to Harriet .
Your dear mother was so clever at all those things !
" You are sick of prosperity and indulgence .
She had not been prepared to have Jane Fairfax succeed Mr . Elton ; but he was actually hurried off by Miss Bates , she jumped away from him at last abruptly to the Coles , to usher in a letter from her niece .
Here ceased the concert part of the evening , for Miss Woodhouse and Miss Fairfax were the only young lady performers ; but soon ( within five minutes ) the proposal of dancing -- originating nobody exactly knew where -- was so effectually promoted by Mr . and Mrs . Cole , that every thing was rapidly clearing away , to give proper space .
" Oh , my love ," cried Mrs . Palmer to her husband , who just then entered the room --" you must help me to persuade the Miss Dashwoods to go to town this winter ."
" That ' s quite unnecessary ; I see Jane every day :-- but as you like .
I , being a husband , and you not being a wife , the claims of the man may very likely strike us with equal force .
He has no occasion to marry , either to fill up his time or his heart ."
To know that _she_ thought his coming certain was enough to make Emma consider it so , and sincerely did she rejoice in their joy .
" I dare say you would ; but I , simple I , saw nothing but the fact , that Miss Fairfax was nearly dashed from the vessel and that Mr . Dixon caught her .-- It was the work of a moment .
No one could dispute her right to come ; the house was her husband ' s from the moment of his father ' s decease ; but the indelicacy of her conduct was so much the greater , and to a woman in Mrs . Dashwood ' s situation , with only common feelings , must have been highly unpleasing ;-- but in HER mind there was a sense of honor so keen , a generosity so romantic , that any offence of the kind , by whomsoever given or received , was to her a source of immoveable disgust .
He seems an excellent man ; and I think him uncommonly pleasing ."
returned Elinor in some confusion ; " indeed , Marianne , I have nothing to tell ."
Harriet did not consider herself as having any thing to complain of .
Should not you , Marianne ?
" So obliged to you !-- so very much obliged to you for the carriage ," resumed Miss Bates .
" I love Willoughby , sincerely love him ; and suspicion of his integrity cannot be more painful to yourself than to me .
Indeed , you are doing a very unkind thing in spreading the report , and you will find that you have though you will not believe me now ."
Perhaps he had quitted the field , had given Louisa up , had ceased to love , had found he did not love her .
Poor man !
What are we to do ?-- The year will wear away at this rate , and nothing done .
It did not happen to suit the Miss Musgroves , I suppose , and they never put themselves out of their way ."
" Ah !
There had been music , singing , talking , laughing , all that was most agreeable ; charming manners in Captain Wentworth , no shyness or reserve ; they seemed all to know each other perfectly , and he was coming the very next morning to shoot with Charles .
She had nothing to say one day that she had not said the day before .
You do us justice , indeed .
His spirits had been greatly recovering lately as might be expected .
The child was to be kept in bed and amused as quietly as possible ; but what was there for a father to do ?
She was pleased with the eagerness to arrive which had made him alter his plan , and travel earlier , later , and quicker , that he might gain half a day .
or is it too short ?"
That would be so very painful a conclusion of their present acquaintance !
Presently , struck by a sudden thought , Charles said --
" Good morning to you ,"-- said he , rising and walking off abruptly .
mortifying and humiliating must be the origin of those regrets , which SHE could wish her not to indulge !
The day approached , the day arrived ; and after a morning of some anxious watching , Frank Churchill , in all the certainty of his own self , reached Randalls before dinner , and every thing was safe .
" Indeed , my dear Mrs Smith , I want none ," cried Anne .
Certainly , delicate ladies have very extraordinary constitutions , Mrs . Elton .
The misfortune of Harriet ' s cold had been pretty well gone through before her arrival .
Elizabeth could not conceive how such an absurd suspicion should occur to her , and indignantly answered for each party ' s perfectly knowing their situation .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse ( who , wherever she is , presides ) to say , that she desires to know what you are all thinking of ?"
She had had it from Mrs Wallis herself , which did not seem bad authority .
It is impossible to express our surprize .
I was very young , and associated only with the young , and we were a thoughtless , gay set , without any strict rules of conduct .
" But why were you not there , Edward ?-- Why did you not come ?"
Being pretty well aware of what sort of joy you must both be feeling , I have been in no hurry with my congratulations ; but I hope it all went off tolerably well .
A ' n ' t I a good boy ?
said he , colouring a little .
Captain Benwick obeyed , and Charles at the same moment , disengaging himself from his wife , they were both with him ; and Louisa was raised up and supported more firmly between them , and everything was done that Anne had prompted , but in vain ; while Captain Wentworth , staggering against the wall for his support , exclaimed in the bitterest agony --
She might talk on ; and if he wanted to say any thing himself , he would only talk louder , and drown her voice .
She was then obliged to be finished , and make her appearance .
An express arrived at Randalls to announce the death of Mrs . Churchill !
" This was the light in which it appeared to those who knew the family , long before you returned to it ; and Colonel Wallis had his eye upon your father enough to be sensible of it , though he did not then visit in Camden Place ; but his regard for Mr Elliot gave him an interest in watching all that was going on there , and when Mr Elliot came to Bath for a day or two , as he happened to do a little before Christmas , Colonel Wallis made him acquainted with the appearance of things , and the reports beginning to prevail .
She had fallen into good hands , known nothing but kindness from the Campbells , and been given an excellent education .
We hear of him for ever at some watering - place or other .
the zeal of the business was gone by .
" Colonel Wallis had been so impatient to be introduced to them !
It was as much as Emma could bear , without being impolite .
Mrs . Dashwood first spoke .
" Perhaps ," said Elinor , " thirty - five and seventeen had better not have any thing to do with matrimony together .
It might be him , perhaps ."
To have his love used so scornfully !
You , Miss Dashwood , would give a general commission for every new print of merit to be sent you -- and as for Marianne , I know her greatness of soul , there would not be music enough in London to content her .
She stopt .
In that very room she had been measured last September , with her two friends .
said I to a friend of mine who was standing near , ( Sir Basil Morley ).
" At this moment , perhaps , Mr . Elton is shewing your picture to his mother and sisters , telling how much more beautiful is the original , and after being asked for it five or six times , allowing them to hear your name , your own dear name ."
I never saw quite so wretched an example of what a sea - faring life can do ; but to a degree , I know it is the same with them all : they are all knocked about , and exposed to every climate , and every weather , till they are not fit to be seen .
" Engaged !
It had been a great disappointment to Mr Musgrove to find that no earlier day could be fixed , so impatient was he to shew his gratitude , by seeing Captain Wentworth under his own roof , and welcoming him to all that was strongest and best in his cellars .
" I hope we shall see you at Barton ," added her ladyship , " as soon as you can conveniently leave town ; and we must put off the party to Whitwell till you return ."
Anybody between fifteen and thirty may have me for asking .
I have not seen one of them to - day , except Mr Musgrove , who just stopped and spoke through the window , but without getting off his horse ; and though I told him how ill I was , not one of them have been near me .
She is rather done for this morning , and must not go so far without help , and I ought to be at that fellow ' s in the Market Place .
If he had but my picture , he says he should be easy .
He is worse than last year .
Elinor could have given her immediate relief by suggesting the possibility of its being Miss Morton ' s mother , rather than her own , whom they were about to behold ; but instead of doing that , she assured her , and with great sincerity , that she did pity her -- to the utter amazement of Lucy , who , though really uncomfortable herself , hoped at least to be an object of irrepressible envy to Elinor .
But take it away , and all _appropriation_ ceases , and a very pretty gallant charade remains , fit for any collection .
" You are expecting her again , you say , this morning ?"
After another short hesitation , " I hope it does not proceed from -- I hope it is not in compliment to Mr .
-- and was hastening to meet him , when Elinor cried out ,
You would not have been so long in coming , if you had had a pleasant idea of Highbury ."
He thanked her with all his heart , and continued some time to speak with serious feeling of his gratitude and happiness .
Had you witnessed my behaviour there , I can hardly suppose you would ever have thought well of me again .
I assure you , I have not seen a soul this whole long morning ."
I am sure it almost killed me once ."
" Perhaps , Miss Marianne ," cried Lucy , eager to take some revenge on her , " you think young men never stand upon engagements , if they have no mind to keep them , little as well as great ."
Each behaving so pleasantly .
" That is precisely what I was going to observe ," cried Mrs Croft .
I dare say I shall catch it ; and my sore - throats , you know , are always worse than anybody ' s ."
Have not I done well , mother ?"
" Excuse me , ma ' am , but this is by no means my intention ; I make no inquiry myself , and should be sorry to have any made by my friends .
Elinor and her mother rose up in amazement at their entrance , and while the eyes of both were fixed on him with an evident wonder and a secret admiration which equally sprung from his appearance , he apologized for his intrusion by relating its cause , in a manner so frank and so graceful that his person , which was uncommonly handsome , received additional charms from his voice and expression .
True , true , you are acquainted with Miss Fairfax ; I remember you knew her at Weymouth , and a fine girl she is .
Very early in April , and tolerably early in the day , the two parties from Hanover Square and Berkeley Street set out from their respective homes , to meet , by appointment , on the road .
" Well , it would serve to cure him of an absurd practice of never asking a question at an inn , which he had adopted , when quite a young man , on the principal of its being very ungenteel to be curious .
to be sure ," cried Emma , " it is always incomprehensible to a man that a woman should ever refuse an offer of marriage .
" No , I just know his name .
" Indeed , the truth was , that poor dear Jane could not bear to see any body -- any body at all -- Mrs . Elton , indeed , could not be denied -- and Mrs . Cole had made such a point -- and Mrs . Perry had said so much -- but , except them , Jane would really see nobody ."
I venture to hint , that Sir Walter Elliot cannot be half so jealous for his own , as John Shepherd will be for him ."
She had left the instrument on the dancing being over , and he had sat down to try to make out an air which he wished to give the Miss Musgroves an idea of .
" I cannot rate her beauty as you do ," said he ; " but she is a pretty little creature , and I am inclined to think very well of her disposition .
On the morning of the third day however , the gloomy anticipations of both were almost done away ; for when Mr . Harris arrived , he declared his patient materially better .
" I would rather have young people settle on a small income at once , and have to struggle with a few difficulties together , than be involved in a long engagement .
It ought to be no recommendation to _you_ .
there was soon no leisure for quarrelling with Mr . Knightley .
I would not have Mr . Knightley know any thing about it for the world !
I certainly will not persuade myself to feel more than I do .
As a house , Barton Cottage , though small , was comfortable and compact ; but as a cottage it was defective , for the building was regular , the roof was tiled , the window shutters were not painted green , nor were the walls covered with honeysuckles .
The hand writing of her mother , never till then unwelcome , was before her ; and , in the acuteness of the disappointment which followed such an ecstasy of more than hope , she felt as if , till that instant , she had never suffered .
Everything was safe enough , and she smiled over the many anxious feelings she had wasted on the subject .
I can never bear to think of you all there without me ."
" A letter from Uppercross Cottage , Sir ."
The heat overcame me ."
That could not be -- and I was formally dismissed from her favour and her house .
Oh !
Emma laughed and disclaimed .
It succeeded , however ; and though Sir Walter must ever look with an evil eye on anyone intending to inhabit that house , and think them infinitely too well off in being permitted to rent it on the highest terms , he was talked into allowing Mr Shepherd to proceed in the treaty , and authorising him to wait on Admiral Croft , who still remained at Taunton , and fix a day for the house being seen .
" To be sure .
oh Lord !
said Anne .
He was at that time a very young man , just engaged in the study of the law ; and Elizabeth found him extremely agreeable , and every plan in his favour was confirmed .
" She could not compose herself -- Mr . Woodhouse would be alarmed -- she had better go ;"-- with most ready encouragement from her friend , therefore , she passed off through another door -- and the moment she was gone , this was the spontaneous burst of Emma ' s feelings : " Oh God !
" Well , Miss Woodhouse !"
" I am afraid , ma ' am , that it is not perfectly understood .
They had their great cousins , to be sure , to resort to for comfort ; but they must long feel that to flatter and follow others , without being flattered and followed in turn , is but a state of half enjoyment .
" They are to be put into Mr . Weston ' s stable , papa .
There could not be an objection .
I could have no other pleasure .
Yes , yes we will have a snug walk together , and I have something to tell you as we go along .
Well , Mrs . Weston , you have prevailed , I hope , and these ladies will oblige us ."
His profession was all that could ever make her friends wish that tenderness less , the dread of a future war all that could dim her sunshine .
` The consequence ,' said she , ` has been a state of perpetual suffering to me ; and so it ought .
When I look back to the first time I saw him !
Will you chuse a wife for me ?-- I am sure I should like any body fixed on by you .
A most improper match for Miss Musgrove of Uppercross ."
She felt that Edward stood very high in her opinion .
Isabella then went to Emma ; but Emma could not so entirely give up the hope of their being all able to get away ; and they were still discussing the point , when Mr . Knightley , who had left the room immediately after his brother ' s first report of the snow , came back again , and told them that he had been out of doors to examine , and could answer for there not being the smallest difficulty in their getting home , whenever they liked it , either now or an hour hence .
She then left the room ; and Elinor dared not follow her to say more , for bound as she was by her promise of secrecy to Lucy , she could give no information that would convince Marianne ; and painful as the consequences of her still continuing in an error might be , she was obliged to submit to it .
no , now I recollect , now I have it ; something happened before tea , but not that .
I hope I have a better taste than to think of Mr . Frank Churchill , who is like nobody by his side .
" Good God !"
" It would not be the nature of any woman who truly loved ."
I came only for Willoughby ' s sake -- and now who cares for me ?
When she reached the White Hart , and made her way to the proper apartment , she found herself neither arriving quite in time , nor the first to arrive .
He saw her too ; yet he looked grave , and seemed irresolute , and only by very slow degrees came at last near enough to speak to her .
" Oh , yes ; he had been staying a fortnight with us .
" But I always thought I SHOULD .
no , no , Henry must have Donwell .
He described one Miss Elliot , and I thought very affectionately of the other ."
This point was just arranged , when a visitor arrived to tear Emma ' s thoughts a little from the one subject which had engrossed them , sleeping or waking , the last twenty - four hours -- Mrs . Weston , who had been calling on her daughter - in - law elect , and took Hartfield in her way home , almost as much in duty to Emma as in pleasure to herself , to relate all the particulars of so interesting an interview .
" You are going in , I suppose ?"
It was Mary ' s hope and belief that he had received a positive dismissal from Henrietta , and her husband lived under the constant dependence of seeing him to - morrow .
So wondered , so talked Mrs . Jennings .
When there , though looking most wretchedly , she ate more and was calmer than her sister had expected .
" I dare say you are , and I am sure I do not at all wonder at it .
I write to the Doctor , indeed !'"
and " John , how are you ?"
.
Every possibility of good was before me , and the first of blessings secured , in obtaining her promises of faith and correspondence .
My poor husband !
In fact , it does not concern you -- it concerns only myself ,-- that is , we hope .-- Humph !-- In short , my dear Emma , there is no occasion to be so uneasy about it .
" You are a good soul ," cried Captain Harville , putting his hand on her arm , quite affectionately .
Her satisfaction in Mr Elliot outweighed all the plague of Mrs Clay .
And she leaned back in the corner , to indulge her murmurs , or to reason them away ; probably a little of both -- such being the commonest process of a not ill - disposed mind .
She felt all the honest pride and complacency which her alliance with the present and future proprietor could fairly warrant , as she viewed the respectable size and style of the building , its suitable , becoming , characteristic situation , low and sheltered -- its ample gardens stretching down to meadows washed by a stream , of which the Abbey , with all the old neglect of prospect , had scarcely a sight -- and its abundance of timber in rows and avenues , which neither fashion nor extravagance had rooted up .-- The house was larger than Hartfield , and totally unlike it , covering a good deal of ground , rambling and irregular , with many comfortable , and one or two handsome rooms .-- It was just what it ought to be , and it looked what it was -- and Emma felt an increasing respect for it , as the residence of a family of such true gentility , untainted in blood and understanding .-- Some faults of temper John Knightley had ; but Isabella had connected herself unexceptionably .
Elinor had not needed this to be assured of the injustice to which her sister was often led in her opinion of others , by the irritable refinement of her own mind , and the too great importance placed by her on the delicacies of a strong sensibility , and the graces of a polished manner .
Anne was too much engaged with Lady Russell to be often walking herself ; but it so happened that one morning , about a week or ten days after the Croft ' s arrival , it suited her best to leave her friend , or her friend ' s carriage , in the lower part of the town , and return alone to Camden Place , and in walking up Milsom Street she had the good fortune to meet with the Admiral .
She was divided from Captain Wentworth .
It would be going only to multiply trouble to the others , and increase his own distress ; and a much better scheme followed and was acted upon .
I saw her there whenever I could , and after the death of my brother , ( which happened about five years ago , and which left to me the possession of the family property ,) she visited me at Delaford .
She could therefore only LOOK her tenderness , and after slightly addressing him , said no more .
Nay , it would be too hard upon you , if it were otherwise .
She paused -- no one spoke .
How , where , when ?-- Let me know it all .
Colonel Brandon , unfortunately for himself , had no such encouragement to think only of Marianne , and in conversing with Elinor he found the greatest consolation for the indifference of her sister .
Elinor , without observing the varying complexion of her sister , and the animated look which spoke no indifference to the plan , immediately gave a grateful but absolute denial for both , in which she believed herself to be speaking their united inclinations .
The composure of mind with which I have brought myself at present to consider the matter , the consolation that I have been willing to admit , have been the effect of constant and painful exertion ;-- they did not spring up of themselves ;-- they did not occur to relieve my spirits at first .-- No , Marianne .-- THEN , if I had not been bound to silence , perhaps nothing could have kept me entirely -- not even what I owed to my dearest friends -- from openly shewing that I was VERY unhappy ."
Reported fit for home service for a year or two , and so I was sent off to the West Indies ."
Emma could say no more .
Harriet certainly was not clever , but she had a sweet , docile , grateful disposition , was totally free from conceit , and only desiring to be guided by any one she looked up to .
It is not to be supposed that any prior attachment on your side -- in short , you know as to an attachment of that kind , it is quite out of the question , the objections are insurmountable -- you have too much sense not to see all that .
In general , it was a very well approved match .
Lucy spoke first .
Going in dismal weather , to return probably in worse ;-- four horses and four servants taken out for nothing but to convey five idle , shivering creatures into colder rooms and worse company than they might have had at home ."
Have you not received my letters ?
Do you think Lady Russell would like that ?"
He seemed hardly to hear her ; he was thoughtful -- and in a manner which shewed him not pleased , soon afterwards said ,
Jane actually on the point of going as governess !
A large party in an hotel ensured a quick - changing , unsettled scene .
Yet he would speak .
" I am to hear from him soon ," continued Mrs . Weston .
She thought it could scarcely escape him to feel that a persuadable temper might sometimes be as much in favour of happiness as a very resolute character .
He will not be led astray ; he will not be misled by others to his ruin ."
I should never deserve her confidence again , after forcing from her a confession of what is meant at present to be unacknowledged to any one .
The dread of being awakened from the happiest dream , was perhaps the most prominent feeling .
CHAPTER IX
Emma learned to be rather glad that there had been such a meeting .
And there was time enough for Emma to form a reasonable judgment , as their visit included all the rest of the morning .
With the fortitude of a devoted novitiate , she had resolved at one - and - twenty to complete the sacrifice , and retire from all the pleasures of life , of rational intercourse , equal society , peace and hope , to penance and mortification for ever .
I did not know what to do .
It was all your doing ," ( turning to Anne .)
" It was something to feel that all the rest of my time might be given to Hartfield .
She had herself been first with him for many years past .
I used to think she was not capable of being fond of any body , except herself : but she has always been kind to him ( in her way -- allowing for little whims and caprices , and expecting every thing to be as she likes ).
He was invited to Kellynch Hall ; he was talked of and expected all the rest of the year ; but he never came .
There is nobody in Highbury who deserves him -- and he has been here a whole year , and has fitted up his house so comfortably , that it would be a shame to have him single any longer -- and I thought when he was joining their hands to - day , he looked so very much as if he would like to have the same kind office done for him !
But " she could never get acquainted with her : she did not know how it was , but there was such coldness and reserve -- such apparent indifference whether she pleased or not -- and then , her aunt was such an eternal talker !-- and she was made such a fuss with by every body !-- and it had been always imagined that they were to be so intimate -- because their ages were the same , every body had supposed they must be so fond of each other ."
think a farmer , ( and with all his sense and all his merit Mr . Martin is nothing more ,) a good match for my intimate friend !
CHAPTER 21
Why should you be less fortunate than your mother ?
One day last spring , in town , I was in company with two men , striking instances of what I am talking of ; Lord St Ives , whose father we all know to have been a country curate , without bread to eat ; I was to give place to Lord St Ives , and a certain Admiral Baldwin , the most deplorable - looking personage you can imagine ; his face the colour of mahogany , rough and rugged to the last degree ; all lines and wrinkles , nine grey hairs of a side , and nothing but a dab of powder at top .
If any thing could increase her delight , it was perceiving that the baby would soon have outgrown its first set of caps .
Let them be sent to Donwell .
She believed he was very clever , and understood every thing .
" I know you did ; I know it all perfectly , but --"
I am come on to give you notice , that papa and mamma are out of spirits this evening , especially mamma ; she is thinking so much of poor Richard !
She and Mr . Frank Churchill had been at Weymouth at the same time .
" Were you really ?-- Well !-- But you observed nothing of course , for it seems to be a new idea to you .-- If I had been there , I think I should have made some discoveries ."
said she , " Elinor will , in all probability be settled for life .
And now to be sure you will be in no hurry to be gone .
Lady Middleton could no longer endure such a conversation , and therefore exerted herself to ask Mr . Palmer if there was any news in the paper .
His dejection was most evident .
Before Mrs Croft had written , he was arrived , and the very next time Anne walked out , she saw him .
Happy creature !
Frank was next to Emma , Jane opposite to them -- and Mr . Knightley so placed as to see them all ; and it was his object to see as much as he could , with as little apparent observation .
" Success supposes endeavour .
Mr . Knightley , he is _not_ a trifling , silly young man .
The old well - established grievance of duty against will , parent against child , was the cause of all .
Come , come , this won ' t do .
She had never been supplanted .
I will fetch your greatcoat and open the garden door for you ."
And here I can admit , that my manners to Miss W ., in being unpleasant to Miss F ., were highly blameable .
To her voluntary communications Emma could get no more approving reply , than ,
-- Emma had promised ; but still Harriet must be excepted .
" Whom are you going to dance with ?"
This is great news , indeed .
Mrs . Goddard ' s school was in high repute -- and very deservedly ; for Highbury was reckoned a particularly healthy spot : she had an ample house and garden , gave the children plenty of wholesome food , let them run about a great deal in the summer , and in winter dressed their chilblains with her own hands .
_Some_ _part_ of his conduct we cannot excuse ."
Believe it to be most fervent , most undeviating , in F . W .
Mrs . Weston was afraid of draughts for the young people in that passage ; and neither Emma nor the gentlemen could tolerate the prospect of being miserably crowded at supper .
Mr . Weston , I could not have believed it of you !"
" Indeed !
As soon as she could , she went after Mary , and having found , and walked back with her to their former station , by the stile , felt some comfort in their whole party being immediately afterwards collected , and once more in motion together .
And we agreed it would be best to have the harp , for it seems to amuse her more than the piano - forte .
The only one among them , whose opposition of feeling could excite any serious anxiety was Lady Russell .
I wish I were anywhere else ."
Mrs . Weston proposed having no regular supper ; merely sandwiches , & c ., set out in the little room ; but that was scouted as a wretched suggestion .
Part of every winter she had been used to spend in Bath ; but Bristol was her home , the very heart of Bristol ; for though the father and mother had died some years ago , an uncle remained -- in the law line -- nothing more distinctly honourable was hazarded of him , than that he was in the law line ; and with him the daughter had lived .
" Though he had not nerves for coming away with us , and setting off again afterwards to pay a formal visit here , he will make his way over to Kellynch one day by himself , you may depend on it .
she must confess to herself that she was not wise yet .
From the expense of the child , however , he was soon relieved .
There does seem to be a something in the air of Hartfield which gives love exactly the right direction , and sends it into the very channel where it ought to flow .
Well , it is the oddest thing to me , that a man should use such a pretty girl so ill !
A short pause succeeded this speech , which was first broken by Miss Steele , who seemed very much disposed for conversation , and who now said rather abruptly , " And how do you like Devonshire , Miss Dashwood ?
He knows where a surgeon is to be found ."
" And is that all you can say for him ?"
Intimacy between Miss Fairfax and me is quite out of the question .
she looks very bad .-- No wonder .
Mr . Weston gave her the history of the engagements at Enscombe , which allowed his son to answer for having an entire fortnight at his command , as well as the route and the method of his journey ; and she listened , and smiled , and congratulated .
She even addressed him once , and looked at him more than once .
was Mr . Woodhouse ' s first exclamation , and all that he could say for some time .
He would be so very .
you see !"
They talked for a few minutes more ; the improvement held ; he even looked down towards the bench , as if he saw a place on it well worth occupying ; when at that moment a touch on her shoulder obliged Anne to turn round .
We shall not be many , you know ."
He was looking about , he was going to the door , he was watching for the sound of other carriages ,-- impatient to begin , or afraid of being always near her .
" Business , you know , may bring money , but friendship hardly ever does ."
Emma thanked him , but could not allow of his disappointing his friend on their account ; her father was sure of his rubber .
We will follow them to Hartfield .
No additional agitation should be thrown at this period among those she loved -- and the evil should not act on herself by anticipation before the appointed time .-- A fortnight , at least , of leisure and peace of mind , to crown every warmer , but more agitating , delight , should be hers .
" Oh !
Harriet kissed her hand in silent and submissive gratitude .
This was Colonel Campbell , who had very highly regarded Fairfax , as an excellent officer and most deserving young man ; and farther , had been indebted to him for such attentions , during a severe camp - fever , as he believed had saved his life .
replied her cousin , with affected earnestness , " and I beg you will contradict it , if you ever hear it talked of ."
This was quite a female case , and it would be highly absurd in him , who could be of no use at home , to shut himself up .
Lady Middleton proposed a rubber of Casino to the others .
Emma felt that her own note had deserved something better ; but it was impossible to quarrel with words , whose tremulous inequality shewed indisposition so plainly , and she thought only of how she might best counteract this unwillingness to be seen or assisted .
A few inferior dwellings were first to be passed , and then , about a quarter of a mile down the lane rose the Vicarage , an old and not very good house , almost as close to the road as it could be .
She will enjoy the scheme , I am sure ; and I do not know a properer person for shewing us how to do away difficulties .
And this , I fear , is all that can be said for the conduct of one , who was at once her uncle and guardian .
As the sun is out , I believe I had better take my three turns while I can .
Humph -- Harriet ' s ready wit !
Is he coming , Louisa ?"
" He chose to say he was employed "--
There they returned again into the past , more exquisitely happy , perhaps , in their re - union , than when it had been first projected ; more tender , more tried , more fixed in a knowledge of each other ' s character , truth , and attachment ; more equal to act , more justified in acting .
Poor little Emma !
Mrs . Jennings had been anxious to see Colonel Brandon well married , ever since her connection with Sir John first brought him to her knowledge ; and she was always anxious to get a good husband for every pretty girl .
Lady Russell ' s composed mind and polite manners were put to some trial on this point , in her intercourse in Camden Place .
It had been a frosty morning , to be sure , a sharp frost , which hardly one woman in a thousand could stand the test of .
On quitting the Cobb , they all went in - doors with their new friends , and found rooms so small as none but those who invite from the heart could think capable of accommodating so many .
He had no concealments with me .
Elton .-- This letter tells us -- it is a short letter -- written in a hurry , merely to give us notice -- it tells us that they are all coming up to town directly , on Mrs . Churchill ' s account -- she has not been well the whole winter , and thinks Enscombe too cold for her -- so they are all to move southward without loss of time ."
Elinor could not hear the declaration , nor witness its proofs without sometimes wondering whether her mother ever recollected Edward .
Mrs . Dashwood could think of no other question , and Thomas and the tablecloth , now alike needless , were soon afterwards dismissed .
you are what you always were !"
" He is very young to settle ," was Mr . Woodhouse ' s observation .
No coffee , I thank you , for me -- never take coffee .-- A little tea if you please , sir , by and bye ,-- no hurry -- Oh !
What say you , Marianne ?"
The idea of becoming what her mother had been ; of having the precious name of " Lady Elliot " first revived in herself ; of being restored to Kellynch , calling it her home again , her home for ever , was a charm which she could not immediately resist .
Then passing through the garden , the gate of which had been left open by Margaret , he bore her directly into the house , whither Margaret was just arrived , and quitted not his hold till he had seated her in a chair in the parlour .
She must allow him to be still frequently coming to look ; any thing less would certainly have been too little in a lover ; and he was ready at the smallest intermission of the pencil , to jump up and see the progress , and be charmed .-- There was no being displeased with such an encourager , for his admiration made him discern a likeness almost before it was possible .
Mrs . Weston was looking so ill , and had an air of so much perturbation , that Emma ' s uneasiness increased ; and the moment they were alone , she eagerly said ,
Lucy made room for her with ready attention , and the two fair rivals were thus seated side by side at the same table , and , with the utmost harmony , engaged in forwarding the same work .
Elinor saw that it WAS his hand , and she could doubt no longer .
dear Mrs . Elton , so obliged to you for the carriage !-- excellent time .
cried Sir Walter .
Of Edward , or at least of some of his concerns , she now received intelligence from Colonel Brandon , who had been into Dorsetshire lately ; and who , treating her at once as the disinterested friend of Mr . Ferrars , and the kind of confidant of himself , talked to her a great deal of the parsonage at Delaford , described its deficiencies , and told her what he meant to do himself towards removing them .-- His behaviour to her in this , as well as in every other particular , his open pleasure in meeting her after an absence of only ten days , his readiness to converse with her , and his deference for her opinion , might very well justify Mrs . Jennings ' s persuasion of his attachment , and would have been enough , perhaps , had not Elinor still , as from the first , believed Marianne his real favourite , to make her suspect it herself .
" Only think of our happening to meet him !-- How very odd !
Restless and dissatisfied every where , her sister could never obtain her opinion of any article of purchase , however it might equally concern them both : she received no pleasure from anything ; was only impatient to be at home again , and could with difficulty govern her vexation at the tediousness of Mrs . Palmer , whose eye was caught by every thing pretty , expensive , or new ; who was wild to buy all , could determine on none , and dawdled away her time in rapture and indecision .
He seemed to me very well off as he was .
The morning hours of the Cottage were always later than those of the other house , and on the morrow the difference was so great that Mary and Anne were not more than beginning breakfast when Charles came in to say that they were just setting off , that he was come for his dogs , that his sisters were following with Captain Wentworth ; his sisters meaning to visit Mary and the child , and Captain Wentworth proposing also to wait on her for a few minutes if not inconvenient ; and though Charles had answered for the child ' s being in no such state as could make it inconvenient , Captain Wentworth would not be satisfied without his running on to give notice .
But why ?
What do you think of him ?
He laughed rather consciously ; and though denying the sentiment , Emma was convinced that it had been so .
The Dashwoods were so prodigiously delighted with the Middletons , that , though not much in the habit of giving anything , they determined to give them -- a dinner ; and soon after their acquaintance began , invited them to dine in Harley Street , where they had taken a very good house for three months .
My feelings are at present in a state of dreadful indecision ; I wish to acquit you , but certainty on either side will be ease to what I now suffer .
You shall share its use with me .
dear , I thought it would have been the death of me !
They seem not able to do any thing without him .--` Upon my word , Mr . E .,' I often say , ` rather you than I .-- I do not know what would become of my crayons and my instrument , if I had half so many applicants .'
Lady Russell was fond of Bath , in short , and disposed to think it must suit them all ; and as to her young friend ' s health , by passing all the warm months with her at Kellynch Lodge , every danger would be avoided ; and it was in fact , a change which must do both health and spirits good .
Mrs . Goddard had dressed it on a Sunday , and asked all the three teachers , Miss Nash , and Miss Prince , and Miss Richardson , to sup with her ."
for he is forced to make every body like him ."
A present of fifty pounds , now and then , will prevent their ever being distressed for money , and will , I think , be amply discharging my promise to my father ."
It is not Willoughby .
She has not the least idea ."
The idea however started by her , was immediately pursued by Colonel Brandon , who was on every occasion mindful of the feelings of others ; and much was said on the subject of rain by both of them .
I had quite depended upon meeting you there .
" You may well be surprised ," continued Lucy ; " for to be sure you could have had no idea of it before ; for I dare say he never dropped the smallest hint of it to you or any of your family ; because it was always meant to be a great secret , and I am sure has been faithfully kept so by me to this hour .
It is not the fashion to say so , but I confess I admire her more than her sister ."
Mrs . Weston could only approve .
" Very well ; I will not plague you any more .
Shabby fellows , both of them !
How is Miss Fairfax ?-- I hope she caught no cold last night .
She found , on reaching home , that she had , as she intended , escaped seeing Mr Elliot ; that he had called and paid them a long morning visit ; but hardly had she congratulated herself , and felt safe , when she heard that he was coming again in the evening .
she was going to exclaim ; but she presently found that it was a family of old friends , who were coming , like herself , by particular desire , to help Mr . Weston ' s judgment ; and they were so very closely followed by another carriage of cousins , who had been entreated to come early with the same distinguishing earnestness , on the same errand , that it seemed as if half the company might soon be collected together for the purpose of preparatory inspection .
You are not aware of what you are doing .
He delighted in being asked , but he would not tell .
" Yes , yes , Mr . Impudence , I know that very well , and I was determined to find out WHERE you had been to .-- I hope you like your house , Miss Marianne .
Elinor would not contend , and only replied , " Whoever may have been so detestably your enemy , let them be cheated of their malignant triumph , my dear sister , by seeing how nobly the consciousness of your own innocence and good intentions supports your spirits .
Jane and I quite ready .
This is a sort of dull - looking evening , that ought to be treated rather as winter than summer .
Long letters from her , quickly succeeding each other , arrived to tell all that she suffered and thought ; to express her anxious solicitude for Marianne , and entreat she would bear up with fortitude under this misfortune .
" I wish you may not get into a scrape , Harriet , whenever he does marry ;-- I mean , as to being acquainted with his wife -- for though his sisters , from a superior education , are not to be altogether objected to , it does not follow that he might marry any body at all fit for you to notice .
I left you in this belief ; and yet , I was determined to see you again .
" The whole of his behaviour ," replied Elinor , " from the beginning to the end of the affair , has been grounded on selfishness .
She had been solicited , when about two - and - twenty , to change her name , by the young man , who not long afterwards found a more willing mind in her younger sister ; and Lady Russell had lamented her refusal ; for Charles Musgrove was the eldest son of a man , whose landed property and general importance were second in that country , only to Sir Walter ' s , and of good character and appearance ; and however Lady Russell might have asked yet for something more , while Anne was nineteen , she would have rejoiced to see her at twenty - two so respectably removed from the partialities and injustice of her father ' s house , and settled so permanently near herself .
They were come to Bath for a few days with Mrs Musgrove , and were at the White Hart .
" So much the better -- or so much the worse :-- I do not know which .
That ' s a consideration indeed .-- But John , as to what I was telling you of my idea of moving the path to Langham , of turning it more to the right that it may not cut through the home meadows , I cannot conceive any difficulty .
THE END
You seem to have forgot all about Lyme ."
Some lavender drops , however , which she was at length persuaded to take , were of use ; and from that time till Mrs . Jennings returned , she continued on the bed quiet and motionless .
She gave a slight glance round the table , and applied herself to it .
This , to Anne , was a decided imperfection .
But the letter , when she was calm enough to read it , brought little comfort .
But then again , the dread of having been too civil , too encouraging herself , probably came over her , for she presently added ,
The Kellynch property was good , but not equal to Sir Walter ' s apprehension of the state required in its possessor .
You have been no friend to Harriet Smith , Emma .
" I am not at all surprized that he should have fallen in love ."
They came : the master of the house was not at home , but the two sisters were together ; and as it chanced that Mrs Croft fell to the share of Anne , while the Admiral sat by Mary , and made himself very agreeable by his good - humoured notice of her little boys , she was well able to watch for a likeness , and if it failed her in the features , to catch it in the voice , or in the turn of sentiment and expression .
" Very true .-- Well , a little while ago it occurred to me how very sad it would be to have Jane Fairfax walking home again , late at night , and cold as the nights are now .
Miss Fairfax , I dare say , would not have me if I were to ask her -- and I am very sure I shall never ask her ."
" What glorious weather for the Admiral and my sister !
Marianne would not let her proceed ;-- and Elinor , satisfied that each felt their own error , wished to avoid any survey of the past that might weaken her sister ' s spirits ; she , therefore , pursuing the first subject , immediately continued ,
He wished to persuade Mr . Woodhouse , as well as Emma , to join the party ; and he knew that to have any of them sitting down out of doors to eat would inevitably make him ill . Mr . Woodhouse must not , under the specious pretence of a morning drive , and an hour or two spent at Donwell , be tempted away to his misery .
To be in company , nicely dressed herself and seeing others nicely dressed , to sit and smile and look pretty , and say nothing , was enough for the happiness of the present hour .
I thought you would , he is so pleasant ; and Mr . Palmer is excessively pleased with you and your sisters I can tell you , and you can ' t think how disappointed he will be if you don ' t come to Cleveland .-- I can ' t imagine why you should object to it ."
" It is as long again as almost all we have had before ."
But at first I must confess , my vanity only was elevated by it .
Unwelcome as it was , Mr . Woodhouse could only give a submissive sigh ; and as Emma saw his spirits affected by the idea of his daughter ' s attachment to her husband , she immediately led to such a branch of the subject as must raise them .
Mrs . Dashwood , whose eyes , as she answered the servant ' s inquiry , had intuitively taken the same direction , was shocked to perceive by Elinor ' s countenance how much she really suffered , and a moment afterwards , alike distressed by Marianne ' s situation , knew not on which child to bestow her principal attention .
" Leave out the two last lines , and there is no reason why you should not write it into your book ."
They seemed deep in talk .
I do assure you that you owe it entirely , at least almost entirely , to your own merit , and Colonel Brandon ' s discernment of it .
The old gentleman died : his will was read , and like almost every other will , gave as much disappointment as pleasure .
I have been told that you were asked to be of the party .
I do not know a more luxurious state , sir , than sitting at one ' s ease to be entertained a whole evening by two such young women ; sometimes with music and sometimes with conversation .
" Yes ; if you and Mr . Woodhouse see no objection , and I trust you cannot , my father hopes his friends will be so kind as to visit him there .
" Donwell !"
I will not torment myself any longer by remaining among friends whose society it is impossible for me now to enjoy ."
He started .
It is a certainty .
Or , perhaps she may not have resources enough in herself to be qualified for a country life .
' THERE , to be sure ,' said she , ' I might have thought myself safe .'
He looked as if he fully understood and honoured such a sentiment .
no one , no one -- he talked to me only of myself ."
said Frank Churchill , as soon as they were out of hearing :--" How well they suit one another !-- Very lucky -- marrying as they did , upon an acquaintance formed only in a public place !-- They only knew each other , I think , a few weeks in Bath !
-- She was afraid she had done her nothing but disservice .-- It was true that she had not to charge herself , in this instance as in the former , with being the sole and original author of the mischief ; with having suggested such feelings as might otherwise never have entered Harriet ' s imagination ; for Harriet had acknowledged her admiration and preference of Frank Churchill before she had ever given her a hint on the subject ; but she felt completely guilty of having encouraged what she might have repressed .
" No ," replied be , with sudden consciousness , " not to find it in YOU ; for I cannot be ignorant that to you , to your goodness , I owe it all .-- I feel it -- I would express it if I could -- but , as you well know , I am no orator ."
And this satisfied Elizabeth : and when the invitation was given to the two present , and promised for the absent , Mary was as completely satisfied .
It was a delightful visit ;-- perfect , in being much too short .
I understand that he intends to take orders .
from Captain Harville , but from him not a word , nor a look !
" No , not Mr . Knightley ; he declined it from the first ; and though I thought he would come , because Mrs . Elton declared she would not let him off , he did not ;-- but my mother , and Jane , and I , were all there , and a very agreeable evening we had .
Having arranged all these matters , looked them through , and put them all to rights , she was just turning to the house with spirits freshened up for the demands of the two little boys , as well as of their grandpapa , when the great iron sweep - gate opened , and two persons entered whom she had never less expected to see together -- Frank Churchill , with Harriet leaning on his arm -- actually Harriet !-- A moment sufficed to convince her that something extraordinary had happened .
We told you about the laundry - door , at Uppercross .
After a moment ' s pause he said : " Though I came only yesterday , I have equipped myself properly for Bath already , you see ," ( pointing to a new umbrella ); " I wish you would make use of it , if you are determined to walk ; though I think it would be more prudent to let me get you a chair ."
" Oh !
A cousin of Mr . Suckling , Mrs . Bragge , had such an infinity of applications ; every body was anxious to be in her family , for she moves in the first circle .
He is an excellent young man , and will suit Harriet exactly ; it will be an ` Exactly so ,' as he says himself ; but he does sigh and languish , and study for compliments rather more than I could endure as a principal .
Such a conclusion could not pass unanswered by Mrs . Weston .
" Mr . Palmer will be so happy to see you ," said she ; " What do you think he said when he heard of your coming with Mamma ?
In music she had been always used to feel alone in the world ; and Mr and Mrs Musgrove ' s fond partiality for their own daughters ' performance , and total indifference to any other person ' s , gave her much more pleasure for their sakes , than mortification for her own .
" I remember once calling you ` George ,' in one of my amiable fits , about ten years ago .
Elinor was half inclined to ask her reason for thinking so , because satisfied that none founded on an impartial consideration of their age , characters , or feelings , could be given ;-- but her mother must always be carried away by her imagination on any interesting subject , and therefore instead of an inquiry , she passed it off with a smile .
She was proved to have been universally mistaken ; and she had not quite done nothing -- for she had done mischief .
Emma then looked up , and immediately saw how it was ; and after a moment ' s debate , as to whether it should pass unnoticed or not , replied ,
Let her marry Robert Martin , and she is safe , respectable , and happy for ever ; but if you encourage her to expect to marry greatly , and teach her to be satisfied with nothing less than a man of consequence and large fortune , she may be a parlour - boarder at Mrs . Goddard ' s all the rest of her life -- or , at least , ( for Harriet Smith is a girl who will marry somebody or other ,) till she grow desperate , and is glad to catch at the old writing - master ' s son ."
Elinor ' s heart , which had undergone many changes in the course of this extraordinary conversation , was now softened again ;-- yet she felt it her duty to check such ideas in her companion as the last .
He was considering her as the source of all the happiness they offered .
These apprehensions , perhaps , were not founded entirely on reason , and certainly not at all on truth .
" Yes ; and heaven knows how much longer we may have to wait .
" We have made very few changes either ," continued the Admiral , after thinking a moment .
" I do not ask you to come in the morning , for we must walk to the park , to call on Lady Middleton ."
It was some minutes before she could go on with her letter , and the frequent bursts of grief which still obliged her , at intervals , to withhold her pen , were proofs enough of her feeling how more than probable it was that she was writing for the last time to Willoughby .
You have shewn that you can dance , and you know we are not really so much brother and sister as to make it at all improper ."
ONE is my wealth !
" This accounts for something which Mr Elliot said last night ," cried Anne .
I think your manners to him encouraging .
Jane often says , when she is here , ` I am sure , grandmama , you must have had very strong eyes to see as you do -- and so much fine work as you have done too !-- I only wish my eyes may last me as well .'"
It was after tea that Jane spoke to Mrs .
said Elinor .
" They would look around them , no doubt , and bless their good fortune ," said Mrs Clay , for Mrs Clay was present : her father had driven her over , nothing being of so much use to Mrs Clay ' s health as a drive to Kellynch : " but I quite agree with my father in thinking a sailor might be a very desirable tenant .
Then continuing his former tone , he said , " And yet this house you would spoil , Mrs . Dashwood ?
Mr . Weston , who had been a widower so long , and who seemed so perfectly comfortable without a wife , so constantly occupied either in his business in town or among his friends here , always acceptable wherever he went , always cheerful -- Mr . Weston need not spend a single evening in the year alone if he did not like it .
As soon as Elinor had finished it , she performed what she concluded to be its writer ' s real design , by placing it in the hands of Mrs . Jennings , who read it aloud with many comments of satisfaction and praise .
I have travelled so little , that every fresh place would be interesting to me ; but there is real beauty at Lyme ; and in short " ( with a faint blush at some recollections ), " altogether my impressions of the place are very agreeable ."
At present , I ask only to hear , once to hear your voice ."
Mrs . Cole had many to agree with her ; every body who spoke on the subject was equally convinced that it must come from Colonel Campbell , and equally rejoiced that such a present had been made ; and there were enough ready to speak to allow Emma to think her own way , and still listen to Mrs . Cole .
" His character is now before you ; expensive , dissipated , and worse than both .
Elinor looked at him with greater astonishment than ever .
No , Emma , your amiable young man can be amiable only in French , not in English .
Their presence was a restraint both on her and on Lucy .
He held the card in his hand after they were gone , as if deeply considering it .
She had been forced into prudence in her youth , she learned romance as she grew older : the natural sequel of an unnatural beginning .
Mrs . Ferrars , with the utmost liberality , will come forward , and settle on him a thousand a year , if the match takes place .
" Myself creating what I saw ,"
I heard him say all this as plain as could possibly be .
Mr . Woodhouse had been safely seated long enough to give the history of it , besides all the history of his own and Isabella ' s coming , and of Emma ' s being to follow , and had indeed just got to the end of his satisfaction that James should come and see his daughter , when the others appeared , and Mrs . Weston , who had been almost wholly engrossed by her attentions to him , was able to turn away and welcome her dear Emma .
she cried , " I have such a secret to tell you about Marianne .
She had had difficulties of every sort to contend with , and in addition to these distresses had been afflicted with a severe rheumatic fever , which , finally settling in her legs , had made her for the present a cripple .
He earnestly pressed her , after giving the particulars of the house and garden , to come with her daughters to Barton Park , the place of his own residence , from whence she might judge , herself , whether Barton Cottage , for the houses were in the same parish , could , by any alteration , be made comfortable to her .
You make the best of it -- but after you have been a week at Hartfield , you are all of you different creatures ; you do not look like the same .
The independence she settled on Robert , through resentment against you , has put it in his power to make his own choice ; and she has actually been bribing one son with a thousand a - year , to do the very deed which she disinherited the other for intending to do .
_You_ do not often overpower me with it ."
No one , I believe , can blame her more than she is disposed to blame herself .
The affection of such a man as Mr . Elton would have been too great a distinction .-- She never could have deserved him -- and nobody but so partial and kind a friend as Miss Woodhouse would have thought it possible .
Don ' t disturb him .
Mrs . John Dashwood had never been a favourite with any of her husband ' s family ; but she had had no opportunity , till the present , of shewing them with how little attention to the comfort of other people she could act when occasion required it .
This was the fact .
" Well , and whose fault is that ?
Emma had no longer an alarm for Henry ; his interest was yet safe ; and she led off the dance with genuine spirit and enjoyment .
Emma could not speak .
This speech at first puzzled Mrs . Jennings exceedingly .
She hoped when clear of Milsom Street to have her curiosity gratified ; but she was still obliged to wait , for the Admiral had made up his mind not to begin till they had gained the greater space and quiet of Belmont ; and as she was not really Mrs Croft , she must let him have his own way .
Mrs . Elton , as elegant as lace and pearls could make her , he looked at in silence -- wanting only to observe enough for Isabella ' s information -- but Miss Fairfax was an old acquaintance and a quiet girl , and he could talk to her .
To finish the interest of the story , the friendship between him and the Harvilles seemed , if possible , augmented by the event which closed all their views of alliance , and Captain Benwick was now living with them entirely .
" Can anything be more galling to the spirit of a man ," continued John , " than to see his younger brother in possession of an estate which might have been his own ?
She was happy , she knew she was happy , and knew she ought to be happy .
" Here ," said he , " ended the worst of my state ; for now I could at least put myself in the way of happiness ; I could exert myself ; I could do something .
" Oh !
Harriet was too intent on the lines to hear .
If he had but asked who the party were !
" And you DO think something better of me than you did ?"
I have really a curiosity to see the person who can give occasion to such directly opposite notions .
I am half agony , half hope .
After talking , however , of the weather , and Bath , and the concert , their conversation began to flag , and so little was said at last , that she was expecting him to go every moment , but he did not ; he seemed in no hurry to leave her ; and presently with renewed spirit , with a little smile , a little glow , he said --
It was known that they were a little acquainted ; but not a syllable of real information could Emma procure as to what he truly was .
I dare say Miss Nash would envy you such an opportunity as this of being married .
Mr . Dashwood attended them down stairs , was introduced to Mrs . Jennings at the door of her carriage , and repeating his hope of being able to call on them the next day , took leave .
This , you know , speaks a great degree of weakness -- but now she is so impatient to be in town , that she means to sleep only two nights on the road .-- So Frank writes word .
" It is hardly worth while , Mr . Willoughby , for you to relate , or for me to listen any longer .
" What a comfort it is , that we think alike about our nephews and nieces .
" Oh !
to be sure I do .
She had no resources for solitude ; and inheriting a considerable share of the Elliot self - importance , was very prone to add to every other distress that of fancying herself neglected and ill - used .
No , except when she thought of her mother , and remembered where she had been used to sit and preside , she had no sigh of that description to heave .
Berkeley Street , January .
" Well , then , LET something be done for them ; but THAT something need not be three thousand pounds .
" We must go ," said Sir John .--" It shall not be put off when we are so near it .
How they were all to be conveyed , he would have made a difficulty if he could , but as his son and daughter ' s carriage and horses were actually at Hartfield , he was not able to make more than a simple question on that head ; it hardly amounted to a doubt ; nor did it occupy Emma long to convince him that they might in one of the carriages find room for Harriet also .
-- and " Dear Miss Woodhouse ," was all that Harriet , with many tender embraces could articulate at first ; but when they did arrive at something more like conversation , it was sufficiently clear to her friend that she saw , felt , anticipated , and remembered just as she ought .
Happy , happy Elinor , YOU cannot have an idea of what I suffer ."
" Isabella and Emma both write beautifully ," said Mr . Woodhouse ; " and always did .
They will have no carriage , no horses , and hardly any servants ; they will keep no company , and can have no expenses of any kind !
Why they WERE different , Robert exclaimed to her himself in the course of a quarter of an hour ' s conversation ; for , talking of his brother , and lamenting the extreme GAUCHERIE which he really believed kept him from mixing in proper society , he candidly and generously attributed it much less to any natural deficiency , than to the misfortune of a private education ; while he himself , though probably without any particular , any material superiority by nature , merely from the advantage of a public school , was as well fitted to mix in the world as any other man .
Is there nothing one can get to comfort her ?
Nothing should separate her from her father .
That ' s one of the ladies in the Irish car party , not at all like her .-- Well , I declare --"
I shall never reflect on my former acquaintance with your family in Devonshire without the most grateful pleasure , and flatter myself it will not be broken by any mistake or misapprehension of my actions .
Could he ever be tolerably happy with Lucy Steele ; could he , were his affection for herself out of the question , with his integrity , his delicacy , and well - informed mind , be satisfied with a wife like her -- illiterate , artful , and selfish ?
The kind - hearted , polite old man might then sit down and feel that he had done his duty , and made every fair lady welcome and easy .
as to that , when a man has once made up his mind to such a thing , somehow or other he will soon find an opportunity .
cried Emma , collecting herself resolutely --" Let us understand each other now , without the possibility of farther mistake .
replied he , with a sigh .
I must order the carriage .
From such commendation as this , however , there was not much to be learned ; Elinor well knew that the sweetest girls in the world were to be met with in every part of England , under every possible variation of form , face , temper and understanding .
Their means were as different as their objects , and equally suited to the advancement of each .
In the society of his nephew and niece , and their children , the old Gentleman ' s days were comfortably spent .
He made it his business to go to Lyme , and his account was still encouraging .
" Yes , and you may guess who it is for .
On Monday evening , my good friend Mrs Rooke let me thus much into the secrets of Marlborough Buildings .
Her situation was altogether the subject of hours of gratitude to Mrs . Weston , and of moments only of regret ; and her satisfaction -- her more than satisfaction -- her cheerful enjoyment , was so just and so apparent , that Emma , well as she knew her father , was sometimes taken by surprize at his being still able to pity ` poor Miss Taylor ,' when they left her at Randalls in the centre of every domestic comfort , or saw her go away in the evening attended by her pleasant husband to a carriage of her own .
I like him very much .
Emma had as much reason to be satisfied with the rest of the party as with Mr . Knightley .
You shall find me as stubborn as you can be artful .
I saw you with the very person who had guided you in that year of misery .
But Mrs Musgrove , who got Anne near her on purpose to thank her most cordially , again and again , for all her attentions to them , concluded a short recapitulation of what she had suffered herself by observing , with a happy glance round the room , that after all she had gone through , nothing was so likely to do her good as a little quiet cheerfulness at home .
And Elinor , in quitting Norland and Edward , cried not as I did .
Brigden stares to see anybody with me but my wife .
The former left them soon after tea to fulfill her evening engagements ; and Elinor was obliged to assist in making a whist table for the others .
Yes ; he had done it .
" We were too magnificent ," said he .
You see how delightfully she writes .
" Your parish there was small ," said Jane .
But let me observe that all histories are against you -- all stories , prose and verse .
" These are done by my eldest sister ," said he ; " and you , as a man of taste , will , I dare say , be pleased with them .
" Walter ," said she , " get down this moment .
And so well was she able to answer her own expectations , that when she joined them at dinner only two hours after she had first suffered the extinction of all her dearest hopes , no one would have supposed from the appearance of the sisters , that Elinor was mourning in secret over obstacles which must divide her for ever from the object of her love , and that Marianne was internally dwelling on the perfections of a man , of whose whole heart she felt thoroughly possessed , and whom she expected to see in every carriage which drove near their house .
but those two lines are "--
" Him !-- never , never .
Don ' t let us be severe , don ' t let us be in a hurry to condemn him .
Certainly not a great match for Louisa Musgrove , but a million times better than marrying among the Hayters ."
I never passed within view of it without admiring its situation , and grieving that no one should live in it .
Mr . Frank Churchill still declined it , looking as serious as he could , and his father gave his hearty support by calling out , " My good friend , this is quite unnecessary ; Frank knows a puddle of water when he sees it , and as to Mrs . Bates ' s , he may get there from the Crown in a hop , step , and jump ."
No ; whatever it might once have been , she could not believe it such at present .
It was censure in common use , and easily given .
Colonel Campbell is a very agreeable man , and Mrs . Campbell a friendly , warm - hearted woman .
I know Mr . John Knightley too well -- I am very sure he understands the value of friendship as well as any body .
Serle understands boiling an egg better than any body .
Mary exclaimed , " Bless me !
With Tuesday came the agreeable prospect of seeing him again , and for a longer time than hitherto ; of judging of his general manners , and by inference , of the meaning of his manners towards herself ; of guessing how soon it might be necessary for her to throw coldness into her air ; and of fancying what the observations of all those might be , who were now seeing them together for the first time .
no , indeed , Charles , I cannot bear to have you go away .
What Mr . Elton had learned from the ostler on the subject , being the accumulation of the ostler ' s own knowledge , and the knowledge of the servants at Randalls , was , that a messenger had come over from Richmond soon after the return of the party from Box Hill -- which messenger , however , had been no more than was expected ; and that Mr . Churchill had sent his nephew a few lines , containing , upon the whole , a tolerable account of Mrs . Churchill , and only wishing him not to delay coming back beyond the next morning early ; but that Mr . Frank Churchill having resolved to go home directly , without waiting at all , and his horse seeming to have got a cold , Tom had been sent off immediately for the Crown chaise , and the ostler had stood out and seen it pass by , the boy going a good pace , and driving very steady .
They had drawn back from many introductions , and still were perpetually having cards left by people of whom they knew nothing .
She was concerned for the disappointment and pain Lady Russell would be feeling ; for the mortifications which must be hanging over her father and sister , and had all the distress of foreseeing many evils , without knowing how to avert any one of them .
There was never any burst of feeling , any warmth of indignation or delight , at the evil or good of others .
She is a relation of the Colonel ' s , my dear ; a very near relation .
Elinor , though greatly shocked , still felt unable to believe it .
Presently the carriage stopt ; she looked up ; it was stopt by Mr . and Mrs . Weston , who were standing to speak to her .
On Friday morning she meant to go very early to Lady Russell , and accomplish the necessary communication ; and she would have gone directly after breakfast , but that Mrs Clay was also going out on some obliging purpose of saving her sister trouble , which determined her to wait till she might be safe from such a companion .
" Such things do occur , undoubtedly ."
" Aye , very true .-- I wish I could recollect more of it .
" I am , & c ."
Nothing but a thorough change of sentiment could account for it .
He could say no more , and rising hastily walked for a few minutes about the room .
how could it be ?-- Then I must have dreamt it -- but I was completely persuaded -- Miss Smith , you walk as if you were tired .
" Poor child !"
These amazing engagements of mine -- what have they been ?
I should be extremely sorry to be giving them any pain .
His emotion on entering the room , in seeing her altered looks , and in receiving the pale hand which she immediately held out to him , was such , as , in Elinor ' s conjecture , must arise from something more than his affection for Marianne , or the consciousness of its being known to others ; and she soon discovered in his melancholy eye and varying complexion as he looked at her sister , the probable recurrence of many past scenes of misery to his mind , brought back by that resemblance between Marianne and Eliza already acknowledged , and now strengthened by the hollow eye , the sickly skin , the posture of reclining weakness , and the warm acknowledgment of peculiar obligation .
I would not have you too sanguine ; though , however it may end , be assured your raising your thoughts to _him_ , is a mark of good taste which I shall always know how to value ."
Emma and Harriet went together ; Miss Bates and her niece , with the Eltons ; the gentlemen on horseback .
There had been three alternatives , London , Bath , or another house in the country .
In such a party , Harriet would be rather a dead weight than otherwise ; but for the poor girl herself , it seemed a peculiarly cruel necessity that was to be placing her in such a state of unmerited punishment .
he can see ready wit in Harriet , but will not dine alone for her ."
The wedding was no distant event , as the parties had only themselves to please , and nothing but the necessary preparations to wait for ; and when he set out for Bath again , there was a general expectation , which a certain glance of Mrs . Cole ' s did not seem to contradict , that when he next entered Highbury he would bring his bride .
The landed property of Hartfield certainly was inconsiderable , being but a sort of notch in the Donwell Abbey estate , to which all the rest of Highbury belonged ; but their fortune , from other sources , was such as to make them scarcely secondary to Donwell Abbey itself , in every other kind of consequence ; and the Woodhouses had long held a high place in the consideration of the neighbourhood which Mr . Elton had first entered not two years ago , to make his way as he could , without any alliances but in trade , or any thing to recommend him to notice but his situation and his civility .-- But he had fancied her in love with him ; that evidently must have been his dependence ; and after raving a little about the seeming incongruity of gentle manners and a conceited head , Emma was obliged in common honesty to stop and admit that her own behaviour to him had been so complaisant and obliging , so full of courtesy and attention , as ( supposing her real motive unperceived ) might warrant a man of ordinary observation and delicacy , like Mr . Elton , in fancying himself a very decided favourite .
I think you play quite as well as she does .
I am tired of doing nothing .
" Gout and decrepitude !"
" Yes .
Elizabeth was certainly very handsome , with well - bred , elegant manners , and her character might never have been penetrated by Mr Elliot , knowing her but in public , and when very young himself .
At this moment they were approaching Ford ' s , and he hastily exclaimed , " Ha !
" But how came the hand to discompose you so much , if it was only a letter of business ?
Glowing and lovely in sensibility and happiness , and more generally admired than she thought about or cared for , she had cheerful or forbearing feelings for every creature around her .
Think of your mother ; think of her misery while YOU suffer : for her sake you must exert yourself ."
Sir John was rather puzzled .
" Upon my word I never heard of it till this moment ."
" Well done , Mrs .
Sir Walter talked of his youngest daughter ; " Mr Elliot must give him leave to present him to his youngest daughter " ( there was no occasion for remembering Mary ); and Anne , smiling and blushing , very becomingly shewed to Mr Elliot the pretty features which he had by no means forgotten , and instantly saw , with amusement at his little start of surprise , that he had not been at all aware of who she was .
" It is very unpleasant , having such connexions !
He was under my uncle ' s care , you know , a considerable while ."
" No , papa , nobody thought of your walking .
And then , her reserve -- I never could attach myself to any one so completely reserved ."
said Miss Steele , as soon as they were gone .
Oh !
Is she ill ?"
Could it be an impartial one ?
A little delay on his side might be very excusable .
" We think NOW ,"-- said Mr . Dashwood , after a short pause , " of ROBERT ' S marrying Miss Morton ."
I remember it was written from Weymouth , and dated Sept . 28th -- and began , ` My dear Madam ,' but I forget how it went on ; and it was signed ` F . C . Weston Churchill .'
" What an exquisite possession a good picture of her would be !
" Oh !
" She seems a most valuable woman indeed -- Her house , her style of living , all bespeak an exceeding good income ; and it is an acquaintance that has not only been of great use to you hitherto , but in the end may prove materially advantageous .-- Her inviting you to town is certainly a vast thing in your favour ; and indeed , it speaks altogether so great a regard for you , that in all probability when she dies you will not be forgotten .-- She must have a great deal to leave ."
With a letter in her outstretched hand , and countenance gaily smiling , from the persuasion of bringing comfort , she entered their room , saying ,
Yes , indeed , there is every thing in the world that can make her happy in it .
She did not repent what she had done ; she still thought herself a better judge of such a point of female right and refinement than he could be ; but yet she had a sort of habitual respect for his judgment in general , which made her dislike having it so loudly against her ; and to have him sitting just opposite to her in angry state , was very disagreeable .
Anne will send for me if anything is the matter ."
She had only time , however , to move closer to the table where he had been writing , when footsteps were heard returning ; the door opened , it was himself .
To hear them talking so much of Captain Wentworth , repeating his name so often , puzzling over past years , and at last ascertaining that it might , that it probably would , turn out to be the very same Captain Wentworth whom they recollected meeting , once or twice , after their coming back from Clifton -- a very fine young man -- but they could not say whether it was seven or eight years ago , was a new sort of trial to Anne ' s nerves .
" We cannot suppose ," said Emma , smiling , " that Mr . Elton would hesitate to assure you of there being a _very_ musical society in Highbury ; and I hope you will not find he has outstepped the truth more than may be pardoned , in consideration of the motive ."
" Very likely .-- I think they are , without exception , the most vulgar girls in Highbury ."
" I am rather of a jealous temper too by nature , and from our different situations in life , from his being so much more in the world than me , and our continual separation , I was enough inclined for suspicion , to have found out the truth in an instant , if there had been the slightest alteration in his behaviour to me when we met , or any lowness of spirits that I could not account for , or if he had talked more of one lady than another , or seemed in any respect less happy at Longstaple than he used to be .
" What do you mean ?"
Elton ?"
' My dear fellow ,' I should have said , ' consider what you are doing .
Did you think he came directly from town ?"
" A man ," said he , " must have a very good opinion of himself when he asks people to leave their own fireside , and encounter such a day as this , for the sake of coming to see him .
repeated Miss Steele , whose ear had caught those words by a sudden pause in Marianne ' s music .-- " Oh , they are talking of their favourite beaux , I dare say ."
You order me , whether you speak or not .
" No , certainly not ; I shall go home in the cool of the evening ."
Her own conduct , as well as her own heart , was before her in the same few minutes .
No positive engagement indeed !
It was so with Elizabeth , still the same handsome Miss Elliot that she had begun to be thirteen years ago , and Sir Walter might be excused , therefore , in forgetting her age , or , at least , be deemed only half a fool , for thinking himself and Elizabeth as blooming as ever , amidst the wreck of the good looks of everybody else ; for he could plainly see how old all the rest of his family and acquaintance were growing .
It did not often happen ; for Mr . John Knightley had really a great regard for his father - in - law , and generally a strong sense of what was due to him ; but it was too often for Emma ' s charity , especially as there was all the pain of apprehension frequently to be endured , though the offence came not .
Early , I know , you had none ."
And having gone through what immediately followed of the basis of their disagreement , and his persisting to act in direct opposition to Jane Fairfax ' s sense of right , he made a fuller pause to say , " This is very bad .-- He had induced her to place herself , for his sake , in a situation of extreme difficulty and uneasiness , and it should have been his first object to prevent her from suffering unnecessarily .-- She must have had much more to contend with , in carrying on the correspondence , than he could .
Picture to yourselves my amazement ; I shall not easily forget Admiral Baldwin .
Mrs . Dashwood , who could not think a man five years younger than herself , so exceedingly ancient as he appeared to the youthful fancy of her daughter , ventured to clear Mrs . Jennings from the probability of wishing to throw ridicule on his age .
" I believe I have been very rude ; but really Miss Fairfax has done her hair in so odd a way -- so very odd a way -- that I cannot keep my eyes from her .
` Have you , upon your honour ?'
A sick chamber may often furnish the worth of volumes ."
They walked thither directly .
Mrs . Dashwood again assured him that no alteration of the kind should be attempted .
He did consent .
God forbid that I should undervalue the warm and faithful feelings of any of my fellow - creatures !
The Coxes were wondering last night whether she would get into any great family .
But , as it is , the disappointment is single , and , I trust , will not be lasting .
A room at an inn was always damp and dangerous ; never properly aired , or fit to be inhabited .
They were describing him themselves ; Sir Walter especially .
" As you are going farther on business , sir , I will take the opportunity of paying a visit , which must be paid some day or other , and therefore may as well be paid now .
" No , I am sure it is not from the Campbells .
" No , ma ' am , not even Lucy if you please .
Delaford is a nice place , I can tell you ; exactly what I call a nice old fashioned place , full of comforts and conveniences ; quite shut in with great garden walls that are covered with the best fruit - trees in the country ; and such a mulberry tree in one corner !
I have no doubt of his having , at times , considerable influence ; but it may be perfectly impossible for him to know beforehand _when_ it will be ."
Lady Russell loved them all ; but it was only in Anne that she could fancy the mother to revive again .
He must be either indifferent or unwilling .
She was sensible and clever ; but eager in everything : her sorrows , her joys , could have no moderation .
A very good man , and very much the gentleman I am sure : but I should think , Miss Elliot ," ( looking with serious reflection ), " I should think he must be rather a dressy man for his time of life .
She then proceeded to say a good deal more than she felt , of the advantage of such an addition to their confined society in Surry ; the pleasure of looking at somebody new ; the gala - day to Highbury entire , which the sight of him would have made ; and ending with reflections on the Churchills again , found herself directly involved in a disagreement with Mr . Knightley ; and , to her great amusement , perceived that she was taking the other side of the question from her real opinion , and making use of Mrs . Weston ' s arguments against herself .
Cannot you guess what this parcel holds ?"
" On the misery of what she had suffered , during the concealment of so many months ," continued Mrs . Weston , " she was energetic .
" I know _that_ is the feeling of you all .
" I certainly did not seek your confidence ," said Elinor ; " but you do me no more than justice in imagining that I may be depended on .
I guessed how it would end ."
said Frank Churchill .
Only to Honiton .
[ Sense and Sensibility by Jane Austen 1811 ]
In all probability he was already the richer of the two , and the Kellynch estate would as surely be his hereafter as the title .
Whenever you are transplanted , like me , Miss Woodhouse , you will understand how very delightful it is to meet with any thing at all like what one has left behind .
was not that her own doing too ?
cried Mr . Elton , " what can be the meaning of this ?-- Miss Smith !-- I never thought of Miss Smith in the whole course of my existence -- never paid her any attentions , but as your friend : never cared whether she were dead or alive , but as your friend .
His cold politeness , his ceremonious grace , were worse than anything .
the pains I have been at to dispel those gloomy ideas and give him cheerfuller views !
The event proved her conjecture right , though it was founded on injustice and error ; for Colonel Brandon DID come in ; and Elinor , who was convinced that solicitude for Marianne brought him thither , and who saw THAT solicitude in his disturbed and melancholy look , and in his anxious though brief inquiry after her , could not forgive her sister for esteeming him so lightly .
Highbury , that airy , cheerful , happy - looking Highbury , would be his constant attraction ."
It was really expected to be a good one , and Captain Wentworth was very fond of music .
" If I did not know her to be happy now ," said Emma , seriously , " which , in spite of every little drawback from her scrupulous conscience , she must be , I could not bear these thanks ;-- for , oh !
" We have been engaged these four years ."
Elinor , pleased to have her governed for a moment by such a motive , though believing it hardly possible that she could sit out the dinner , said no more ; and adjusting her dress for her as well as she could , while Marianne still remained on the bed , was ready to assist her into the dining room as soon as they were summoned to it .
All that I had to do , was to avoid you both .
It is not a mere bit of gossip .
" No ," said he , " I never said any thing so irrational .
She had some satisfaction in finding that he was really going out of Bath the next morning , going early , and that he would be gone the greater part of two days .
She was pondering , in the meanwhile , upon the possibility , without seeming very rude , of making her escape from Jane Fairfax ' s letter , and had almost resolved on hurrying away directly under some slight excuse , when Miss Bates turned to her again and seized her attention .
Had I done as I ought !
Without his sanction I could not hope to be listened to again .-- I spoke ; circumstances were in my favour ; the late event had softened away his pride , and he was , earlier than I could have anticipated , wholly reconciled and complying ; and could say at last , poor man !
Command yourself enough to say no more , and I will endeavour to forget it ."
this must be the very shop that every body attends every day of their lives , as my father informs me .
" I am sure ," said she , " I have no doubt in the world of your faithfully keeping this secret , because you must know of what importance it is to us , not to have it reach his mother ; for she would never approve of it , I dare say .
Marianne was going to retort , but she remembered her promises , and forbore .
" Perhaps ," said Elinor , smiling , " we may come to the same point .
There was no difference between him and the man who had stood on the steps at Lyme , admiring Anne as she passed , except in the air and look and manner of the privileged relation and friend .
South End is prohibited , if you please .
In my heart I feel little -- scarcely any doubt of his preference .
I only know that I never yet heard her admit any instance of a second attachment ' s being pardonable ."
She was certainly not a woman of family , but well educated , accomplished , rich , and excessively in love with his friend .
Angry as she was , the thought of the moment made her resolve to restrain herself when she did speak .
" Where is the young man ?"
" She is a riddle , quite a riddle !"
" May I , indeed ?-- Then I will speak the truth , and nothing suits me so well .
He is but young , and his uncle , perhaps --"
His spirits , during the last two or three days , though still very unequal , were greatly improved -- he grew more and more partial to the house and environs -- never spoke of going away without a sigh -- declared his time to be wholly disengaged -- even doubted to what place he should go when he left them -- but still , go he must .
You will like Harriet .
The cold insolence of Mrs . Ferrars ' s general behaviour to her sister , seemed , to her , to foretell such difficulties and distresses to Elinor , as her own wounded heart taught her to think of with horror ; and urged by a strong impulse of affectionate sensibility , she moved after a moment , to her sister ' s chair , and putting one arm round her neck , and one cheek close to hers , said in a low , but eager , voice ,
I hope it is a dry situation , and that her health will be taken good care of .
He quitted the militia and engaged in trade , having brothers already established in a good way in London , which afforded him a favourable opening .
We must do whatever is to be done quickest , and I think our feelings will lose no time there .
" He had better not be in a hurry .
Marianne Dashwood was born to an extraordinary fate .
But happily Lady Dalrymple always chooses to be farther off ; and we were exceedingly well placed , that is , for hearing ; I must not say for seeing , because I appear to have seen very little ."
what would Frank Churchill say to her , if he were here ?
But at last she found herself with some surprise , accosted by Miss Steele , who , though looking rather shy , expressed great satisfaction in meeting them , and on receiving encouragement from the particular kindness of Mrs . Jennings , left her own party for a short time , to join their ' s .
She immediately felt how reasonable it was , that Mrs Croft should be thinking and speaking of Edward , and not of Frederick ; and with shame at her own forgetfulness applied herself to the knowledge of their former neighbour ' s present state with proper interest .
" The profession has its utility , but I should be sorry to see any friend of mine belonging to it ."
But of his minuter propensities , as you call them you have from peculiar circumstances been kept more ignorant than myself .
But you have not explained to me the particular reason of your coming now , nor how you heard of her illness ."
" ELLIOT OF KELLYNCH HALL .
Margaret returned , and the family were again all restored to each other , again quietly settled at the cottage ; and if not pursuing their usual studies with quite so much vigour as when they first came to Barton , at least planning a vigorous prosecution of them in future .
But Jane , it seems , had a letter from them very lately , and not a word was said about it .
thought Emma .
I long to inquire ; and how will MY interference be borne ."
But , my dear Elinor , what is the matter with Marianne ?-- she looks very unwell , has lost her colour , and is grown quite thin .
John Knightley ' s being a lawyer is very inconvenient .-- Poor Isabella !-- she is sadly taken away from us all !-- and how sorry she will be when she comes , not to see Miss Taylor here !"
About a week after their arrival , it became certain that Willoughby was also arrived .
As to men and women , our opinions are sometimes very different ; but with regard to these children , I observe we never disagree ."
I had quite determined to go away again ."
I am sure you have , somehow or other , imbibed such a notion .
Perhaps he wanted to speak to her , of his attachment to Harriet ; he might be watching for encouragement to begin .-- She did not , could not , feel equal to lead the way to any such subject .
" Poor girl !"
You did not use to like cards ; but time makes many changes ."
A blush overspread Anne ' s cheeks .
" Perhaps ," cried Anne , struck by a sudden idea , " you sometimes spoke of me to Mr Elliot ?"
Now you know all ."
It was creditable to have a sister married , and she might flatter herself with having been greatly instrumental to the connexion , by keeping Anne with her in the autumn ; and as her own sister must be better than her husband ' s sisters , it was very agreeable that Captain Wentworth should be a richer man than either Captain Benwick or Charles Hayter .
" Your gallantry is really unanswerable .
Ah !
Not know Mr Elliot , indeed !
She was sensible that you had never received any proper acknowledgment from herself ."
I will not apologize therefore for bringing it forward again ."
A great deal too handsome , in my opinion , for any place THEY can ever afford to live in .
" Your first was the Asp , I remember ; we will look for the Asp ."
she cried .--" Well !"
How unworthily occupied !
Every thing declared it ; his own attentions , his father ' s hints , his mother - in - law ' s guarded silence ; it was all in unison ; words , conduct , discretion , and indiscretion , told the same story .
" What !-- while attending me in all my misery , has this been on your heart ?-- And I have reproached you for being happy !"
Knightley .-- Every other part of her mind was disgusting .
Willoughby ' s behaviour in taking leave of them , his embarrassment , and affectation of cheerfulness , and , above all , his unwillingness to accept her mother ' s invitation , a backwardness so unlike a lover , so unlike himself , greatly disturbed her .
She is not satisfied .
As soon as they were out of the house , his enquiries began .
He had talked of going down to Plymouth for a week , and wanted to persuade Captain Benwick to go with him ; but , as Charles maintained to the last , Captain Benwick seemed much more disposed to ride over to Kellynch .
Then the baked apples came home , Mrs . Wallis sent them by her boy ; they are extremely civil and obliging to us , the Wallises , always -- I have heard some people say that Mrs . Wallis can be uncivil and give a very rude answer , but we have never known any thing but the greatest attention from them .
Mrs Harville ' s giving it as her opinion that her husband would have quite walking enough by the time he reached home , determined the direction of all the party in what was to be their last walk ; they would accompany them to their door , and then return and set off themselves .
I should like to know his present opinion , as to the probability of the event he has been in dread of ; whether he considers the danger to be lessening or not ."
What dreadful weather we have had !
You cannot think what a sweet place Cleveland is ; and we are so gay now , for Mr . Palmer is always going about the country canvassing against the election ; and so many people came to dine with us that I never saw before , it is quite charming !
" Ah !"
" I do not think it will ," stopping to look once more at all the outward wretchedness of the place , and recall the still greater within .
Elinor watched his countenance and saw its expression becoming more tranquil .
As John Dashwood had no more pleasure in music than his eldest sister , his mind was equally at liberty to fix on any thing else ; and a thought struck him during the evening , which he communicated to his wife , for her approbation , when they got home .
She must laugh at such a close !
She returned just in time to join the others as they quitted the house , on an excursion through its more immediate premises ; and the rest of the morning was easily whiled away , in lounging round the kitchen garden , examining the bloom upon its walls , and listening to the gardener ' s lamentations upon blights , in dawdling through the green - house , where the loss of her favourite plants , unwarily exposed , and nipped by the lingering frost , raised the laughter of Charlotte ,-- and in visiting her poultry - yard , where , in the disappointed hopes of her dairy - maid , by hens forsaking their nests , or being stolen by a fox , or in the rapid decrease of a promising young brood , she found fresh sources of merriment .
Let us wait , therefore , for this letter .
I have not nerves for the sort of thing ."
No -- pray let her have time to look about her ."
They would feel that they could trust him ; that the nephew who had done rightly by his father , would do rightly by them ; for they know , as well as he does , as well as all the world must know , that he ought to pay this visit to his father ; and while meanly exerting their power to delay it , are in their hearts not thinking the better of him for submitting to their whims .
He paused .
said Colonel Brandon , " there is , indeed !
He could not see her in a situation of such danger , without trying to preserve her .
She did all that I wanted .
One can guess what will happen there .
She knew who had been frequenting Uppercross .
In two minutes , however , he relented in his own favour ; and muttering something about spruce - beer , walked off .
Had she intended ever to _marry_ him , it might have been worth while to pause and consider , and try to understand the value of his preference , and the character of his temper ; but for all the purposes of their acquaintance , he was quite amiable enough .
I was therefore entered at Oxford and have been properly idle ever since ."
-- seemed to burst from an overcharged heart , and to describe somewhat of the continual endurance to be practised by her , even towards some of those who loved her best .
I never could have an idea of any body else -- and so I thought you knew .
" Shall you be in town this winter , Miss Dashwood ?"
Her eagerness to be gone from Norland was preserved from diminution by the evident satisfaction of her daughter - in - law in the prospect of her removal ; a satisfaction which was but feebly attempted to be concealed under a cold invitation to her to defer her departure .
But I do not like the corner into Vicarage Lane ."
She hoped , on turning her head , to see the master of the house ; but it proved to be one much less calculated for making matters easy -- Charles Hayter , probably not at all better pleased by the sight of Captain Wentworth than Captain Wentworth had been by the sight of Anne .
she cried , " this is a moment of great happiness !-- This would almost make amends for every thing ?"
We shall soon overtake her .
She saw Mrs Clay fairly off , therefore , before she began to talk of spending the morning in Rivers Street .
I have been but half a friend to her ; and if she were _not_ to feel this disappointment so very much , I am sure I have not an idea of any body else who would be at all desirable for her ;-- William Coxe -- Oh !
my dear sir , as my mother says , our friends are only too good to us .
My behaviour , during the very happy fortnight which I spent with you , did not , I hope , lay me open to reprehension , excepting on one point .
It was enough for her that he appeared to be amiable , that he loved her daughter , and that Elinor returned the partiality .
I should not wonder , if he was to be in the greatest passion !-- and Mr . Donavan thinks just the same .
Elinor ' s compassion for him increased , as she had reason to suspect that the misery of disappointed love had already been known to him .
And after all , what did it signify to my character in the opinion of Marianne and her friends , in what language my answer was couched ?-- It must have been only to one end .
It was almost too wonderful for belief , and it was with the greatest effort that she could remain in the room , preserve an air of calmness , and answer the common questions of the moment .
" Marianne ," cried her sister , " how can you say so ?
But I would not alarm you too much .
--
One hates to be officious , to be giving bad impressions , making mischief .
He wished her a good morning , and , attended by Sir John , left the room .
" Yes , as long as I could bear their noise ; but they are so unmanageable that they do me more harm than good .
I never met with a disposition more truly amiable ."
You are too bountiful !
I am sure she does .
They had a very fine day for Box Hill ; and all the other outward circumstances of arrangement , accommodation , and punctuality , were in favour of a pleasant party .
Mrs . Weston told me you were here .-- Oh !
The time may come when Harry will regret that so large a sum was parted with .
" Oh !
She was to convey Harriet , and they drove to the Crown in good time , the Randalls party just sufficiently before them .
" If I had not persuaded Harriet into liking the man , I could have borne any thing .
Was not the very sight of the friend who sat behind you , was not the recollection of what had been , the knowledge of her influence , the indelible , immoveable impression of what persuasion had once done -- was it not all against me ?"
She might in time regain tranquillity ; but HE , what had he to look forward to ?
" In town !"
Mr . Willoughby is unfathomable !
He was gone long enough to have had a very comfortable meal , and came back all the better -- grown quite cool -- and , with good manners , like himself -- able to draw a chair close to them , take an interest in their employment ; and regret , in a reasonable way , that he should be so late .
I am sick of it .
The law was allowed to be genteel enough ; many young men , who had chambers in the Temple , made a very good appearance in the first circles , and drove about town in very knowing gigs .
The subject was continued no farther ; and Marianne remained thoughtfully silent , till a new object suddenly engaged her attention .
I should be sorry to be more ."
" It is over !
He is so very strict and scrupulous in his notions ; over - scrupulous I must say .
" About two hundred a year ."
The Miss Steeles kept their station at the park , and were to quit it only with the rest of the family .
Lady Russell was now perfectly decided in her opinion of Mr Elliot .
But I had no inclination for the law , even in this less abstruse study of it , which my family approved .
Anne talked of being perfectly ready , and tried to look it ; but she felt that could Henrietta have known the regret and reluctance of her heart in quitting that chair , in preparing to quit the room , she would have found , in all her own sensations for her cousin , in the very security of his affection , wherewith to pity her .
I acquit Edward of essential misconduct .
My dear Admiral , that post !
Mr . Elton made his appearance .
" My father would say ` yes ,' Mr . Knightley ` no ;' and Miss Bates and I that he is just the happy medium .
" Oh , no !
" Highbury gossips !-- Tiresome wretches !"
" Might not they use both rooms , and dance across the passage ?"
" No , I did not promise .
Exquisite , quite exquisite !-- Still , however , having proceeded so far , one is unwilling to give the matter up .
Her own happiness , and her own spirits , were at least very certain ; and she joined Mrs . Jennings most heartily in her expectation of their being all comfortably together in Delaford Parsonage before Michaelmas .
He will be a completely gross , vulgar farmer , totally inattentive to appearances , and thinking of nothing but profit and loss ."
Her manners were open , easy , and decided , like one who had no distrust of herself , and no doubts of what to do ; without any approach to coarseness , however , or any want of good humour .
We talked it all over with Mr . Weston last night .
" Mr . Brandon was very well I hope ?"
This was the principle on which Anne wanted her father to be proceeding , his friends to be urging him .
but do not torture me so .
" I do not know why you should say so .
" Yes ," he replied , with some embarrassment , " almost ever since ; I have been once or twice at Delaford for a few days , but it has never been in my power to return to Barton ."
Emma ' s confusion , and the acknowledged intimacy , seemed to declare her affection engaged .
As Mrs . Jennings could talk on no other subject , Elinor soon saw the necessity of preparing Marianne for its discussion .
But she had made up her mind how to meet this presumption so many weeks before it appeared , that when the insult came at last , it found her very differently affected .
His eyes want all that spirit , that fire , which at once announce virtue and intelligence .
Who is your party ?"
" I cannot wish to be snowed up a week at Randalls ."
He knows he is wrong , and has nothing rational to urge .-- Bad .-- He ought not to have formed the engagement .--` His father ' s disposition :'-- he is unjust , however , to his father .
Is it true , pray ?
" Oh yes !-- that is , no -- I do not know -- but I believe he has read a good deal -- but not what you would think any thing of .
He , who had ever boasted of being an Elliot , and whose feelings , as to connection , were only too strict to suit the unfeudal tone of the present day .
I do not want the match -- I do not want to injure dear little Henry -- but the idea has been given me by circumstances ; and if Mr . Knightley really wished to marry , you would not have him refrain on Henry ' s account , a boy of six years old , who knows nothing of the matter ?"
There must be three months , at least , of deep mourning ; but when they are over , I imagine there will be nothing more to wait for ."
Hitherto there had been but one opinion of Captain Wentworth among the Musgroves and their dependencies .
No sooner was she out of sight , than Emma exclaimed ,
I could not help being provoked ; for after all my pains , and when I had really made a very good likeness of it --( Mrs . Weston and I were quite agreed in thinking it _very_ like )-- only too handsome -- too flattering -- but that was a fault on the right side -- after all this , came poor dear Isabella ' s cold approbation of --" Yes , it was a little like -- but to be sure it did not do him justice ."
Would they only have laughed at her about the Doctor !
He was too diffident to do justice to himself ; but when his natural shyness was overcome , his behaviour gave every indication of an open , affectionate heart .
I must think your statement by no means fair .
Indeed I think it quite melancholy to have such excellent people as Dr and Mrs Shirley , who have been doing good all their lives , wearing out their last days in a place like Uppercross , where , excepting our family , they seem shut out from all the world .
A mind lively and at ease , can do with seeing nothing , and can see nothing that does not answer .
" Really !-- Well , this is very astonishing !-- no relationship !-- no connection between them !-- and now that livings fetch such a price !-- what was the value of this ?"
You are more likely to have done harm to yourself , than good to them , by interference ."
She thanked him for it with all her heart , spoke of Edward ' s principles and disposition with that praise which she knew them to deserve ; and promised to undertake the commission with pleasure , if it were really his wish to put off so agreeable an office to another .
Can you seriously ask me , Harriet , whether I imagined him attached to another woman at the very time that I was -- tacitly , if not openly -- encouraging you to give way to your own feelings ?-- I never had the slightest suspicion , till within the last hour , of Mr . Frank Churchill ' s having the least regard for Jane Fairfax .
.
As far as good intentions went , we were _both_ right , and I must say that no effects on my side of the argument have yet proved wrong .
" You are very good .-- The future must be my proof .
Elinor said no more , and turning again to the three letters which now raised a much stronger curiosity than before , directly ran over the contents of all .
But it is so uncertain , when I may have it in my power to return , that I dare not engage for it at all ."
I should like to know how many of all my numerous engagements take place without your being of the party ; and why I am to be supposed in danger of wanting leisure to attend to the little boys .
I have always wanted some other motive for his conduct than appeared .
By one measure I might have saved myself .
Emma was in the humour to value simplicity and modesty to the utmost ; and all that was amiable , all that ought to be attaching , seemed on Harriet ' s side , not her own .
His answer was not very encouraging .
They are very well behaved , good kind of girls ; and I think the attention is due to them , as their uncle did so very well by Edward .
She must see you ."
You know what he thinks of Cowper and Scott ; you are certain of his estimating their beauties as he ought , and you have received every assurance of his admiring Pope no more than is proper .
Mr . Elton must now be left to himself .
He feared there must be some decided involvement .
Have you thought , my dear , where you shall put her -- and what room there will be for the children ?"
only think .
A man who felt rightly would say at once , simply and resolutely , to Mrs . Churchill -- ` Every sacrifice of mere pleasure you will always find me ready to make to your convenience ; but I must go and see my father immediately .
Another room of much better size might be secured for the purpose ; but it was at the other end of the house , and a long awkward passage must be gone through to get at it .
The appearance of the latter could not be more than the surprise of the moment .
Mrs . Ferrars can never forget that Edward is her son ."
After they had been assembled about an hour , Mr . Palmer sauntered towards the Miss Dashwoods to express his surprise on seeing them in town , though Colonel Brandon had been first informed of their arrival at his house , and he had himself said something very droll on hearing that they were to come .
Nobody doubts her right to have precedence of mamma , but it would be more becoming in her not to be always insisting on it .
When I came to you last week and found you alone , I came determined to know the truth ; though irresolute what to do when it WAS known .
I was willing to hope that you must fare better ."
" I have scarce had the pleasure of seeing you , Miss Woodhouse ," she shortly afterwards began , " since the party to Box Hill .
But at last there seemed a perverse turn ; it seemed all at once as if he were more afraid of its being a bad sore throat on her account , than on Harriet ' s -- more anxious that she should escape the infection , than that there should be no infection in the complaint .
It was owing to _her_ persuasion , as she thought his being out in bad weather did him a great deal of harm .
No , upon my honour , there is no unsteadiness of character .
Emma could not doubt .
She had lately lost sight even of her father and sister and Bath .
The letters from town , which a few days before would have made every nerve in Elinor ' s body thrill with transport , now arrived to be read with less emotion that mirth .
You did not enjoy them as I did ; you appeared tired the whole time .
But she was very anxious to have it done with the least possible pain to him and Elizabeth .
" Now ,"-- said Emma , when they were fairly beyond the sweep gates ,-- " now Mr . Weston , do let me know what has happened ."
It suited Mary best to think Henrietta the one preferred on the very account of Charles Hayter , whose pretensions she wished to see put an end to .
It was not the gipsies -- it was not Mr . Frank Churchill that I meant .
Neither of them were ever again to be mentioned to Mrs . Ferrars ; and even , if she might hereafter be induced to forgive her son , his wife should never be acknowledged as her daughter , nor be permitted to appear in her presence .
He has been gone only four weeks ."
If Mr . Knightley did not begin seriously , he was obliged to proceed so , for his proposal was caught at with delight ; and the " Oh !
It was impossible for any one to be more thoroughly good - natured , or more determined to be happy than Mrs . Palmer .
Come , and eat my strawberries .
I assure you I began to think my caro sposo would be absolutely jealous .
Oh !
" Have they any acquaintance here ?"
I know what is due to my tenant ."
The moment of her stepping forward in the Octagon Room to speak to him : the moment of Mr Elliot ' s appearing and tearing her away , and one or two subsequent moments , marked by returning hope or increasing despondency , were dwelt on with energy .
It is not time or opportunity that is to determine intimacy ;-- it is disposition alone .
Willoughby was out of the question .
In Edward ' s farewell there was no distinction between Elinor and me : it was the good wishes of an affectionate brother to both .
Mrs . Dashwood was too much astonished to speak , and another pause succeeded .
Their opportunity of acquaintance in the house of Mr . Pratt was a foundation for the rest , at once indisputable and alarming ; and Edward ' s visit near Plymouth , his melancholy state of mind , his dissatisfaction at his own prospects , his uncertain behaviour towards herself , the intimate knowledge of the Miss Steeles as to Norland and their family connections , which had often surprised her , the picture , the letter , the ring , formed altogether such a body of evidence , as overcame every fear of condemning him unfairly , and established as a fact , which no partiality could set aside , his ill - treatment of herself .-- Her resentment of such behaviour , her indignation at having been its dupe , for a short time made her feel only for herself ; but other ideas , other considerations , soon arose .
He really pressed them , with some earnestness , to consider Norland as their home ; and , as no plan appeared so eligible to Mrs . Dashwood as remaining there till she could accommodate herself with a house in the neighbourhood , his invitation was accepted .
However , I will not disturb you ( seeing her preparing to write .)
I am sure the service Mr . Frank Churchill had rendered you , in protecting you from the gipsies , was spoken of ."
She played .
Lady Russell saw either less or more than her young friend , for she saw nothing to excite distrust .
She could not keep her appointment punctually , however ; the weather was unfavourable , and she had grieved over the rain on her friends ' account , and felt it very much on her own , before she was able to attempt the walk .
I will move a little farther off ."
Oh !
It was by no means his daughter ' s wish that the intellects of Highbury in general should be put under requisition .
When Robert first sought her acquaintance , and privately visited her in Bartlett ' s Buildings , it was only with the view imputed to him by his brother .
" Dear me !
If I had my senses about me I might have called in Conduit Street in my way home , and told them of it .
" As soon as my aunt gets well , I shall go abroad ," said he .
" I beg your pardon , madam , this is your seat ;" and though she immediately drew back with a decided negative , he was not to be induced to sit down again .
But it was not immediately that an opportunity of doing so could be commanded , though Lucy was as well disposed as herself to take advantage of any that occurred ; for the weather was not often fine enough to allow of their joining in a walk , where they might most easily separate themselves from the others ; and though they met at least every other evening either at the park or cottage , and chiefly at the former , they could not be supposed to meet for the sake of conversation .
Though I fully believe that , at present , you have not the smallest intention of accepting him , there is no saying what may happen .
I only stood at the door , and heard what I could .
Happily it was not necessary to speak .
Mr . Woodhouse soon followed ; and the necessity of exertion made him composed .
Mr . Elton , my astonishment is much beyond any thing I can express .
She believed he was looking at her ; probably reflecting on what she had said , and trying to understand the manner .
On the contents of that letter depended all which this world could do for her .
He had just compunction enough for having done nothing for his sisters himself , to be exceedingly anxious that everybody else should do a great deal ; and an offer from Colonel Brandon , or a legacy from Mrs . Jennings , was the easiest means of atoning for his own neglect .
CHAPTER VI
This was his only secret exception , when he said to his sister , in answer to her suppositions :--
I was repulsed indeed !
They will be much more able to give YOU something ."
He put down his gun and ran to her assistance .
His companions suggested only what could palliate imprudence , or smooth objections ; and by the time they had talked it all over together , and he had talked it all over again with Emma , in their walk back to Hartfield , he was become perfectly reconciled , and not far from thinking it the very best thing that Frank could possibly have done .
He had condescended to mortgage as far as he had the power , but he would never condescend to sell .
" Nonsensical girl !"
" To be sure it will .
I am sure she will be an excellent servant ; and it will be a great comfort to poor Miss Taylor to have somebody about her that she is used to see .
I am glad they are not on this side of the way .
He has been very deceitful !
" But for my satisfaction , if you will have the goodness to ring for Mary ; stay : I am sure you will have the still greater goodness of going yourself into my bedroom , and bringing me the small inlaid box which you will find on the upper shelf of the closet ."
In one point she was fully justified .
" And when she had come away , Mrs . Martin was so very kind as to send Mrs . Goddard a beautiful goose -- the finest goose Mrs . Goddard had ever seen .
But Mrs . Dashwood began shortly to give over every hope of the kind , and to be convinced , from the general drift of his discourse , that his assistance extended no farther than their maintenance for six months at Norland .
THAT was due to the folly of Robert , and the cunning of his wife ; and it was earned by them before many months had passed away .
cried Marianne .
It would be the greatest pleasure to them , if you could allow me to attend you there .
She then began to speak of you , and of the great kindness you had shewn her during her illness ; and with a blush which shewed me how it was all connected , desired me , whenever I had an opportunity , to thank you -- I could not thank you too much -- for every wish and every endeavour to do her good .
She had raised herself from the ground , but her foot had been twisted in her fall , and she was scarcely able to stand .
" No , my dear ," said her father instantly ; " _that_ I am sure you are not .
Mr . Elton looked all alarm on the occasion , as he exclaimed ,
I believe ," she added in a low voice , " he would have been very glad to have had me , if he could .
" Your sister , I hope , cannot be offended ," said he , " by the resemblance I have fancied between her and my poor disgraced relation .
The girls were wild for dancing ; and the evenings ended , occasionally , in an unpremeditated little ball .
The husband had died just in time to be spared the full knowledge of it .
Harriet would be anxiety enough ; she need no longer be unhappy about Jane , whose troubles and whose ill - health having , of course , the same origin , must be equally under cure .-- Her days of insignificance and evil were over .-- She would soon be well , and happy , and prosperous .-- Emma could now imagine why her own attentions had been slighted .
It was painful to look upon their deserted grounds , and still worse to anticipate the new hands they were to fall into ; and to escape the solitariness and the melancholy of so altered a village , and be out of the way when Admiral and Mrs Croft first arrived , she had determined to make her own absence from home begin when she must give up Anne .
I should hold myself guilty of greater impropriety in accepting a horse from my brother , than from Willoughby .
She followed another carriage to Mr . Cole ' s door ; and was pleased to see that it was Mr . Knightley ' s ; for Mr . Knightley keeping no horses , having little spare money and a great deal of health , activity , and independence , was too apt , in Emma ' s opinion , to get about as he could , and not use his carriage so often as became the owner of Donwell Abbey .
" My being charming , Harriet , is not quite enough to induce me to marry ; I must find other people charming -- one other person at least .
Between Barton and Delaford , there was that constant communication which strong family affection would naturally dictate ;-- and among the merits and the happiness of Elinor and Marianne , let it not be ranked as the least considerable , that though sisters , and living almost within sight of each other , they could live without disagreement between themselves , or producing coolness between their husbands .
But be it sweetness or be it stupidity in her -- quickness of friendship , or dulness of feeling -- there was one person , I think , who must have felt it : Miss Fairfax herself .
He cut her short with ,
Nothing can stand more retired from the road than Maple Grove .
I give you this caution now , because I shall never speak to you again on the subject .
Mr . and Mrs . John Knightley were to come down in August , and she was invited to remain till they could bring her back .
She felt that she should like to have had the power of refusal ; and afterwards , as the idea of the party to be assembled there , consisting precisely of those whose society was dearest to her , occurred again and again , she did not know that she might not have been tempted to accept .
" You mean to go to Delaford after them I suppose ," said Elinor , with a faint smile .
He had been too much expected by the best judges , for surprize -- but there was great joy .
There he had seen everything to exalt in his estimation the woman he had lost ; and there begun to deplore the pride , the folly , the madness of resentment , which had kept him from trying to regain her when thrown in his way .
" Ah !
You may do as you like , but I shall go to the play ."
She thought it would be an excellent match ; and only too palpably desirable , natural , and probable , for her to have much merit in planning it .
To Isabella , the relief of such tidings was very great , and they were scarcely less acceptable to Emma on her father ' s account , who was immediately set as much at ease on the subject as his nervous constitution allowed ; but the alarm that had been raised could not be appeased so as to admit of any comfort for him while he continued at Randalls .
But neither geography nor tranquillity could come all at once , and Emma was now in a humour to resolve that they should both come in time .
Why should not they explore to Box Hill though the Sucklings did not come ?
And , in short -- what do you think of my wife ' s style of letter - writing ?-- delicate -- tender -- truly feminine -- was it not ?"
I can only pronounce him to be a sensible man , well - bred , well - informed , of gentle address , and , I believe , possessing an amiable heart ."
I do not by any means engage for its being returned .
She appeared to me to play well , that is , with considerable taste , but I know nothing of the matter myself .-- I am excessively fond of music , but without the smallest skill or right of judging of any body ' s performance .-- I have been used to hear her ' s admired ; and I remember one proof of her being thought to play well :-- a man , a very musical man , and in love with another woman -- engaged to her -- on the point of marriage -- would yet never ask that other woman to sit down to the instrument , if the lady in question could sit down instead -- never seemed to like to hear one if he could hear the other .
He seems a most gentlemanlike man ; and I think , Elinor , I may congratulate you on the prospect of a very respectable establishment in life ."
There was a bustle on her approach ; a good deal of moving and talking .
Mr . Perry might have reason to regret the alteration , but nobody else could ."
I have nothing more to shew you , or to say -- except that I am now going to throw them both behind the fire , and I wish you to see me do it ."
It was precisely what Emma would have wished , had she deemed it possible enough for wishing .
" Upon my word it would ," replied Mary .
To her own heart it was a delightful affair , to her imagination it was even a ridiculous one , but to her reason , her judgment , it was completely a puzzle .
Came there about the year --- 5 , I take it .
Mary does not above half like Henrietta ' s match .
" No , upon no account in the world , Mr . Weston ; I am much obliged to you for reminding me .
At breakfast she neither ate , nor attempted to eat any thing ; and Elinor ' s attention was then all employed , not in urging her , not in pitying her , nor in appearing to regard her , but in endeavouring to engage Mrs . Jenning ' s notice entirely to herself .
Anne had gone unhappy to school , grieving for the loss of a mother whom she had dearly loved , feeling her separation from home , and suffering as a girl of fourteen , of strong sensibility and not high spirits , must suffer at such a time ; and Miss Hamilton , three years older than herself , but still from the want of near relations and a settled home , remaining another year at school , had been useful and good to her in a way which had considerably lessened her misery , and could never be remembered with indifference .
Do not you think , Anne , it is being over - scrupulous ?
Sailors work hard enough for their comforts , we must all allow ."
Emma could not forgive her .
The appearance of the little sitting - room as they entered , was tranquillity itself ; Mrs . Bates , deprived of her usual employment , slumbering on one side of the fire , Frank Churchill , at a table near her , most deedily occupied about her spectacles , and Jane Fairfax , standing with her back to them , intent on her pianoforte .
He promised to join me here , and pay his respects to you ."
She joined them sometimes at Sir John ' s , sometimes at her own house ; but wherever it was , she always came in excellent spirits , full of delight and importance , attributing Charlotte ' s well doing to her own care , and ready to give so exact , so minute a detail of her situation , as only Miss Steele had curiosity enough to desire .
cried Harriet , warmly .
As for Marianne , on the pangs which so unhappy a meeting must already have given her , and on those still more severe which might await her in its probable consequence , she could not reflect without the deepest concern .
" I am glad I have done being in love with him .
" It might have been a very sad accident ."
You do nothing .
He had no reason to wish his hair longer , to conceal any confusion of face ; no reason to wish the money unspent , to improve his spirits .
They think Charles might not be learned and bookish enough to please Lady Russell , and that therefore , she persuaded Anne to refuse him ."
" Mr Elliot ," replied Mrs Smith , " at that period of his life , had one object in view : to make his fortune , and by a rather quicker process than the law .
" I can guess what his business is , however ," said Mrs . Jennings exultingly .
After a short interval , however , he came towards her , and spoke again .
I never heard of such a thing .
But yet -- he is not the kind of young man -- there is something wanting -- his figure is not striking ; it has none of that grace which I should expect in the man who could seriously attach my sister .
It was a very useful note , for it supplied them with fresh matter for thought and conversation during the rest of their lonely evening .
" Might he not ?-- Is not it possible , that when enquiring , as you thought , into the state of your affections , he might be alluding to Mr . Martin -- he might have Mr . Martin ' s interest in view ?
" Ah !
But yet I think there was something wanting .
Fetch Miss Bates .
" Yes , and what you told me on that head , confirmed an idea which I had entertained before .-- I do not mean to reflect upon the good intentions of either Mr . Dixon or Miss Fairfax , but I cannot help suspecting either that , after making his proposals to her friend , he had the misfortune to fall in love with _her_ , or that he became conscious of a little attachment on her side .
united , ( _courtship_ , you know ,) what reverse we have !
" And so she is to come to us next Friday or Saturday , and the Campbells leave town in their way to Holyhead the Monday following -- as you will find from Jane ' s letter .
I assure you I feel it none .
This specimen of the Miss Steeles was enough .
" Mrs . Jennings told me ," said he , " that you wished to speak with me , at least I understood her so -- or I certainly should not have intruded on you in such a manner ; though at the same time , I should have been extremely sorry to leave London without seeing you and your sister ; especially as it will most likely be some time -- it is not probable that I should soon have the pleasure of meeting you again .
It is so much beyond any thing I deserve .
To know that he has not thrown himself away , is such a comfort !-- She does seem a charming young woman , just what he deserves .
Three thousand pounds !
Not that I had any doubt before -- I have so often heard Mr . Woodhouse recommend a baked apple .
If they are anxious to see you _happily_ married , here is a man whose amiable character gives every assurance of it ;-- if they wish to have you settled in the same country and circle which they have chosen to place you in , here it will be accomplished ; and if their only object is that you should , in the common phrase , be _well_ married , here is the comfortable fortune , the respectable establishment , the rise in the world which must satisfy them ."
You will find some friends here ."
He may be sure of every woman ' s approbation while he writes with such gallantry ."
A bride , you know , my dear , is always the first in company , let the others be who they may ."
I was sure that would come out , if it was so .
I think Mr . John Knightley very far from looking well ."
He was invited to contribute any really good enigmas , charades , or conundrums that he might recollect ; and she had the pleasure of seeing him most intently at work with his recollections ; and at the same time , as she could perceive , most earnestly careful that nothing ungallant , nothing that did not breathe a compliment to the sex should pass his lips .
-- but checking himself --" No , no , I understand you -- forgive me -- I am pleased that you can say even so much .-- He is no object of regret , indeed !
You can slip in from the shrubbery at any time ; and there you will find we keep our umbrellas hanging up by that door .
" It will not do ," whispered Frank to Emma ; " they are most of them affronted .
The real circumstances of this pathetic piece of family history were , that the Musgroves had had the ill fortune of a very troublesome , hopeless son ; and the good fortune to lose him before he reached his twentieth year ; that he had been sent to sea because he was stupid and unmanageable on shore ; that he had been very little cared for at any time by his family , though quite as much as he deserved ; seldom heard of , and scarcely at all regretted , when the intelligence of his death abroad had worked its way to Uppercross , two years before .
I do not know what he would be at .
One accompaniment to her song took her agreeably by surprize -- a second , slightly but correctly taken by Frank Churchill .
I do not wonder at you .
" You mean ," answered Elinor , with forced calmness , " Mr . Willoughby ' s marriage with Miss Grey .
With all my heart .
" Charming Miss Woodhouse !
Mrs Smith ' s enjoyments were not spoiled by this improvement of income , with some improvement of health , and the acquisition of such friends to be often with , for her cheerfulness and mental alacrity did not fail her ; and while these prime supplies of good remained , she might have bid defiance even to greater accessions of worldly prosperity .
But however , all that is quite out of the question -- not to be thought of or mentioned -- as to any attachment you know -- it never could be -- all that is gone by .
CHAPTER IV
Her father fondly replied , " Ah !
Enscombe however was gracious , gracious in fact , if not in word .
Marianne had promised to be guided by her mother ' s opinion , and she submitted to it therefore without opposition , though it proved perfectly different from what she wished and expected , though she felt it to be entirely wrong , formed on mistaken grounds , and that by requiring her longer continuance in London it deprived her of the only possible alleviation of her wretchedness , the personal sympathy of her mother , and doomed her to such society and such scenes as must prevent her ever knowing a moment ' s rest .
He tried to reason himself out of fears , which the different judgment of the apothecary seemed to render absurd ; but the many hours of each day in which he was left entirely alone , were but too favourable for the admission of every melancholy idea , and he could not expel from his mind the persuasion that he should see Marianne no more .
Half and hour ' s solitude and reflection might have tranquillized her ; but the ten minutes only which now passed before she was interrupted , with all the restraints of her situation , could do nothing towards tranquillity .
Every moment had brought a fresh surprize ; and every surprize must be matter of humiliation to her .-- How to understand it all !
On his side were the inquiries ,--" Was she a horsewoman ?-- Pleasant rides ?-- Pleasant walks ?-- Had they a large neighbourhood ?-- Highbury , perhaps , afforded society enough ?-- There were several very pretty houses in and about it .-- Balls -- had they balls ?-- Was it a musical society ?"
Two such could never be granted .
She could do justice to the superiority of Lady Russell ' s motives in this , over those of her father and Elizabeth ; she could honour all the better feelings of her calmness ; but the general air of oblivion among them was highly important from whatever it sprung ; and in the event of Admiral Croft ' s really taking Kellynch Hall , she rejoiced anew over the conviction which had always been most grateful to her , of the past being known to those three only among her connexions , by whom no syllable , she believed , would ever be whispered , and in the trust that among his , the brother only with whom he had been residing , had received any information of their short - lived engagement .
She saw it all ; and entering into her feelings , promoted her quitting the house immediately , and watched her safely off with the zeal of a friend .
The rich brother - in - law near Bristol was the pride of the alliance , and his place and his carriages were the pride of him .
I should be unwilling , I own , to live in any other part of the town ;-- there is hardly any other that I could be satisfied to have my children in : but _we_ are so remarkably airy !-- Mr .
The muffin last night -- if it had been handed round once , I think it would have been enough ."
Their interesting , almost too interesting conversation must be broken up for a time , but slight was the penance compared with the happiness which brought it on !
She hardly knew what to say .
It will be a very fine object from many parts of the park , and the flower - garden will slope down just before it , and be exceedingly pretty .
I hope my mother is now convinced that I have no more talents than inclination for a public life !"
" The Crofts have arrived in Bath ?
It was some days before she saw Jane Fairfax , to judge of her honest regret in this woeful change ; but when they did meet , her composure was odious .
A few minutes were sufficient for making her acquainted with her own heart .
They had looked forward and arranged everything before the others began to reflect .
You are not very gay yourself ."
Anne , I am so very unwell !
You are my best cure ."
How does he know that he is going on well , or that there may not be a sudden change half an hour hence ?
Her character appeared absolutely changed .
" It would be very hard upon Mr . Weston if she did not , papa .-- You quite forget poor Mr .
She hesitated a moment , and then replied , " With you , if you will ask me ."
He may have as strong a sense of what would be right , as you can have , without being so equal , under particular circumstances , to act up to it ."
You must not run away from us now .
a fine complimentary opening : But it is his way .
Mrs . Weston ' s partiality for him is very great , and , as you may suppose , most gratifying to me .
How that visit was to be acknowledged -- what would be necessary -- and what might be safest , had been a point of some doubtful consideration .
But everything must take its chance .
When they were seated in the dining room , Sir John observed with regret that they were only eight all together .
repeated Emma .
But in every respect , as she saw more of her , she approved her , and was confirmed in all her kind designs .
For a moment or two she could say no more ; but when this emotion had passed away , she added , in a firmer tone ,
Facts or opinions which are to pass through the hands of so many , to be misconceived by folly in one , and ignorance in another , can hardly have much truth left ."
-- He thought of it all day long , and for many days successively , and he did not repent .
But ( lowering her voice )-- nobody speaks except ourselves , and it is rather too much to be talking nonsense for the entertainment of seven silent people ."
May be his sister is worse at Avignon , and has sent for him over .
She lived with her single daughter in a very small way , and was considered with all the regard and respect which a harmless old lady , under such untoward circumstances , can excite .
One would imagine you had never heard my father speak of her personal misfortunes , though I know you must fifty times .
And it always ended in " Kitty , a fair but frozen maid ."
" But have you really heard of nothing ?"
my dear ," said the Admiral , " when he had got a wife , he will sing a different tune .
The more I think of it , the more probable it appears .
Our first care has been to keep the matter secret .-- You knew nothing of me , or my family , and , therefore , there could be no OCCASION for ever mentioning my name to you ; and , as he was always particularly afraid of his sister ' s suspecting any thing , THAT was reason enough for his not mentioning it ."
Some scruples and some reluctance the widower - father may be supposed to have felt ; but as they were overcome by other considerations , the child was given up to the care and the wealth of the Churchills , and he had only his own comfort to seek , and his own situation to improve as he could .
" Nay , nay , read on .-- You will find how very much he suffers ."
Before Sir Walter had reached this point , Anne ' s eyes had caught the right direction , and distinguished Captain Wentworth standing among a cluster of men at a little distance .
One could not leave her out ."
She had bright dark eyes , good teeth , and altogether an agreeable face ; though her reddened and weather - beaten complexion , the consequence of her having been almost as much at sea as her husband , made her seem to have lived some years longer in the world than her real eight - and - thirty .
All that she could tell she told most gladly , but the all was little for one who had been there , and unsatisfactory for such an enquirer as Mrs Smith , who had already heard , through the short cut of a laundress and a waiter , rather more of the general success and produce of the evening than Anne could relate , and who now asked in vain for several particulars of the company .
yes -- very -- a very pleasing young woman ."
One likes to hear what is going on , to be au fait as to the newest modes of being trifling and silly .
To the Great House accordingly they went , to sit the full half hour in the old - fashioned square parlour , with a small carpet and shining floor , to which the present daughters of the house were gradually giving the proper air of confusion by a grand piano - forte and a harp , flower - stands and little tables placed in every direction .
She wished it might be possible for her to avoid ever seeing Captain Wentworth at the Hall : those rooms had witnessed former meetings which would be brought too painfully before her ; but she was yet more anxious for the possibility of Lady Russell and Captain Wentworth never meeting anywhere .
For the rest of his character and habits , they were marked , as far as Elinor could perceive , with no traits at all unusual in his sex and time of life .
She could not help thinking much of the extraordinary circumstances attending their acquaintance , of the right which he seemed to have to interest her , by everything in situation , by his own sentiments , by his early prepossession .
We must feel that every addition to your father ' s society , among his equals or superiors , may be of use in diverting his thoughts from those who are beneath him ."
Sir Walter thought much of Mrs Wallis ; she was said to be an excessively pretty woman , beautiful .
Her influence would have been enough .
just behind .
You understand every thing .
There cannot be two opinions about _him_ .
" Yes , yes , I understand you .
She had previously , in the anticipation of their marriage , been very apprehensive of losing her friend by it ; but on being assured that he could have made no attempt of that nature , since he did not even know her to be in Bath , it immediately occurred , that something might be done in her favour by the influence of the woman he loved , and she had been hastily preparing to interest Anne ' s feelings , as far as the observances due to Mr Elliot ' s character would allow , when Anne ' s refutation of the supposed engagement changed the face of everything ; and while it took from her the new - formed hope of succeeding in the object of her first anxiety , left her at least the comfort of telling the whole story her own way .
" You have had your little boys with you ?"
" I see Mr . Ferrars myself , ma ' am , this morning in Exeter , and his lady too , Miss Steele as was .
" I certainly must ," said she .
Short letters from Frank were received at Randalls , communicating all that was immediately important of their state and plans .
" Don ' t pretend to deny it , because you know it is what every body talks of .
She has been so kind as to promise it .
Elinor smiled , and shook her head .
Some are gone to the ponds , and some to the lime walk .
He could only obtain a promise of their calling at the Park within a day or two , and then left them in amazement at their indifference , to walk home and boast anew of their attractions to the Miss Steeles , as he had been already boasting of the Miss Steeles to them .
The forgiveness , at first , indeed , as was reasonable , comprehended only Robert ; and Lucy , who had owed his mother no duty and therefore could have transgressed none , still remained some weeks longer unpardoned .
He was soon pretty well resigned .
" If they were one day to be your own , Marianne , you would not be justified in what you have done ."
She has now been a longer time stationary there , than she ever was before , and she begins to want change .
" My father tried it more than once , formerly ; but without receiving any benefit ; and Mr . Perry , whose name , I dare say , is not unknown to you , does not conceive it would be at all more likely to be useful now ."
Every feeling was offended ; and the forbearance of her outward submission left a heavy arrear due of secret severity in her reflections on the unmanageable goodwill of Mr . Weston ' s temper .
very true .
She had little difficulty in understanding thus much of her rival ' s intentions , and while she was firmly resolved to act by her as every principle of honour and honesty directed , to combat her own affection for Edward and to see him as little as possible ; she could not deny herself the comfort of endeavouring to convince Lucy that her heart was unwounded .
She could not understand his present feelings , whether he were really suffering much from disappointment or not ; and till that point were settled , she could not be quite herself .
" You will get nothing to the purpose from Miss Bates ," said Emma .
" And mine ," added Sir Walter .
At Lyme .
" I am happy you approved ," said Emma , smiling ; " but I hope I am not often deficient in what is due to guests at Hartfield ."
Was not it Mrs Speed , as usual , or the maid ?
" Your allowing yourself to be so occupied and so unhappy about Mr . Elton ' s marrying , Harriet , is the strongest reproach you can make _me_ .
" By the bye ," said Frank Churchill to Mrs . Weston presently , " what became of Mr . Perry ' s plan of setting up his carriage ?"
how he ' ll chuckle over this news !
I am always watching her to admire ; and I do pity her from my heart ."
" Miss Woodhouse , as you will not give me your opinion , I must do as well as I can by myself ; and I have now quite determined , and really almost made up my mind -- to refuse Mr . Martin .
' Tis a sad business ."
Elinor , who foresaw a fairer opening for the point she had in view , in such a party as this was likely to be , more at liberty among themselves under the tranquil and well - bred direction of Lady Middleton than when her husband united them together in one noisy purpose , immediately accepted the invitation ; Margaret , with her mother ' s permission , was equally compliant , and Marianne , though always unwilling to join any of their parties , was persuaded by her mother , who could not bear to have her seclude herself from any chance of amusement , to go likewise .
She considered it as an act of indispensable duty to clear away the claims of creditors with all the expedition which the most comprehensive retrenchments could secure , and saw no dignity in anything short of it .
It seemed as if every thing united to promise the most interesting consequences .
I could get the nicest house in world for you , next door to ours , in Hanover - square .
" Harriet , poor Harriet !"
Harriet , Harriet , do not deceive yourself ; do not be run away with by gratitude and compassion .
Two material advantages of Bath over London had of course been given all their weight : its more convenient distance from Kellynch , only fifty miles , and Lady Russell ' s spending some part of every winter there ; and to the very great satisfaction of Lady Russell , whose first views on the projected change had been for Bath , Sir Walter and Elizabeth were induced to believe that they should lose neither consequence nor enjoyment by settling there .
Look at her .
I am sorry you do not happen to know Mrs .
a considerable journey ."
" Very well indeed !-- how prettily she writes !-- aye , that was quite proper to let him be off if he would .
" Oh !
If you only hope to have your assertion contradicted , as I must suppose to be the case , you ought to recollect that I am the last person in the world to do it .
A prize indeed would Kellynch Hall be to him ; rather the greatest prize of all , let him have taken ever so many before ; hey , Shepherd ?"
Elinor , persuaded that he had some communication to make in which her sister was concerned , impatiently expected its opening .
He had begun to talk of it a week ago ; and by way of doing something , as shooting was over , Charles had proposed coming with him , and Mrs Harville had seemed to like the idea of it very much , as an advantage to her husband ; but Mary could not bear to be left , and had made herself so unhappy about it , that for a day or two everything seemed to be in suspense , or at an end .
Without emulating the feelings of an Emma towards her Henry , she would have attended on Louisa with a zeal above the common claims of regard , for his sake ; and she hoped he would not long be so unjust as to suppose she would shrink unnecessarily from the office of a friend .
As soon as they left the dining - room , Elinor enquired of her about it ; and great was her surprise when she found that every circumstance related by Mrs . Jennings was perfectly true .
.
Of what he had then written , nothing was to be retracted or qualified .
Miss Hawkins perhaps wanted a home , and thought this the best offer she was likely to have ."
It was an arrangement , however , justified in its effects , if not in its cause ; for nothing ever appeared in Robert ' s style of living or of talking to give a suspicion of his regretting the extent of his income , as either leaving his brother too little , or bringing himself too much ;-- and if Edward might be judged from the ready discharge of his duties in every particular , from an increasing attachment to his wife and his home , and from the regular cheerfulness of his spirits , he might be supposed no less contented with his lot , no less free from every wish of an exchange .
From our relative situation , those attentions were her due , and were felt to be so .-- Whether Miss Woodhouse began really to understand me before the expiration of that fortnight , I cannot say ;-- when I called to take leave of her , I remember that I was within a moment of confessing the truth , and I then fancied she was not without suspicion ; but I have no doubt of her having since detected me , at least in some degree .-- She may not have surmised the whole , but her quickness must have penetrated a part .
We must go in the carriage , to be sure ."
She was entreated to give them as much of her time as possible , invited for every day and all day long , or rather claimed as part of the family ; and , in return , she naturally fell into all her wonted ways of attention and assistance , and on Charles ' s leaving them together , was listening to Mrs Musgrove ' s history of Louisa , and to Henrietta ' s of herself , giving opinions on business , and recommendations to shops ; with intervals of every help which Mary required , from altering her ribbon to settling her accounts ; from finding her keys , and assorting her trinkets , to trying to convince her that she was not ill - used by anybody ; which Mary , well amused as she generally was , in her station at a window overlooking the entrance to the Pump Room , could not but have her moments of imagining .
He seemed by this connexion between the families , quite to belong to her .
You would not think it perhaps , but Marianne WAS remarkably handsome a few months ago ; quite as handsome as Elinor .-- Now you see it is all gone ."
that I had not given way to her at the fatal moment !
He was on the move immediately ; but coming back , said ,
Lucy ' s marriage , the unceasing and reasonable wonder among them all , formed of course one of the earliest discussions of the lovers ;-- and Elinor ' s particular knowledge of each party made it appear to her in every view , as one of the most extraordinary and unaccountable circumstances she had ever heard .
You look as if you would not do such a thing again ."
I mean never to be later in rising than six , and from that time till dinner I shall divide every moment between music and reading .
He did , on the condition of some promises on her side : such as that , if she came home cold , she would be sure to warm herself thoroughly ; if hungry , that she would take something to eat ; that her own maid should sit up for her ; and that Serle and the butler should see that every thing were safe in the house , as usual .
The power of observation would be soon given -- frightfully soon it appeared when her thoughts were in one course .
" You , Emma , who have so few opportunities of dancing , you are really out of luck ; you are very much out of luck !"
It would be hard , indeed " ( with a faltering voice ), " if woman ' s feelings were to be added to all this ."
And with a quivering lip he wound up the whole by adding , " Poor Fanny !
" Perfectly , perfectly right , my dearest Harriet ; you are doing just what you ought .
Elinor , having once delivered her opinion on William ' s side , by which she offended Mrs . Ferrars and Fanny still more , did not see the necessity of enforcing it by any farther assertion ; and Marianne , when called on for her ' s , offended them all , by declaring that she had no opinion to give , as she had never thought about it .
I abhor every common - place phrase by which wit is intended ; and ' setting one ' s cap at a man ,' or ' making a conquest ,' are the most odious of all .
Did not keep the horses a moment .
Mr . and Mrs . Elton appeared ; and all the smiles and the proprieties passed .
By all their calculations there was just time for this ; but as they drew near the Cobb , there was such a general wish to walk along it once more , all were so inclined , and Louisa soon grew so determined , that the difference of a quarter of an hour , it was found , would be no difference at all ; so with all the kind leave - taking , and all the kind interchange of invitations and promises which may be imagined , they parted from Captain and Mrs Harville at their own door , and still accompanied by Captain Benwick , who seemed to cling to them to the last , proceeded to make the proper adieus to the Cobb .
It is a dreadful thing to have you forced to live there !
She would sit whenever I asked her .
"` Smallridge !'
This event had very lately taken place ; too lately for any thing to be yet attempted by her less fortunate friend towards entering on her path of duty ; though she had now reached the age which her own judgment had fixed on for beginning .
He had not been known to them as a boy ; but soon after Lady Elliot ' s death , Sir Walter had sought the acquaintance , and though his overtures had not been met with any warmth , he had persevered in seeking it , making allowance for the modest drawing - back of youth ; and , in one of their spring excursions to London , when Elizabeth was in her first bloom , Mr Elliot had been forced into the introduction .
Mr . Knightley and Harriet Smith !-- It was a union to distance every wonder of the kind .-- The attachment of Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax became commonplace , threadbare , stale in the comparison , exciting no surprize , presenting no disparity , affording nothing to be said or thought .-- Mr .
Her astonishment and confusion were very great on his so sudden appearance .
" With dark narrow stairs and a kitchen that smokes , I suppose ," said Elinor .
If they are not put off , he cannot stir .
But Elinor had more to do ; and so anxious was she , for his sake and her own , to do it well , that she forced herself , after a moment ' s recollection , to welcome him , with a look and manner that were almost easy , and almost open ; and another struggle , another effort still improved them .
CHAPTER XI
She could scarcely eat any dinner , and when they afterwards returned to the drawing room , seemed anxiously listening to the sound of every carriage .
It is only the Palmers .
" It is very unfair to judge of any body ' s conduct , without an intimate knowledge of their situation .
It was nothing more than that his pen had fallen down ; but Anne was startled at finding him nearer than she had supposed , and half inclined to suspect that the pen had only fallen because he had been occupied by them , striving to catch sounds , which yet she did not think he could have caught .
My spirits rallied with the morning , and I felt that I had still a motive for remaining here ."
We can ask your sisters some other year , you know ; but the Miss Steeles may not be in town any more .
But though confidence between them was , by this public discovery , restored to its proper state , it was not a subject on which either of them were fond of dwelling when alone .
You must at least have felt that my being acquainted with it could not add to its safety ."
Is this fair , Mrs .
CHAPTER 17
His mother explained to him her liberal designs , in case of his marrying Miss Morton ; told him she would settle on him the Norfolk estate , which , clear of land - tax , brings in a good thousand a - year ; offered even , when matters grew desperate , to make it twelve hundred ; and in opposition to this , if he still persisted in this low connection , represented to him the certain penury that must attend the match .
That Emma was his object appeared indisputable .
Mr . Knightley soon saw that he had lost his moment , and that not another syllable of communication could rest with him .
It has not made him happy .
how delightful !
They were scarcely ever without some friends staying with them in the house , and they kept more company of every kind than any other family in the neighbourhood .
CHAPTER XVI
no , indeed !
Mr Shepherd laughed , as he knew he must , at this wit , and then added --
We each begin , probably , with a little bias towards our own sex ; and upon that bias build every circumstance in favour of it which has occurred within our own circle ; many of which circumstances ( perhaps those very cases which strike us the most ) may be precisely such as cannot be brought forward without betraying a confidence , or in some respect saying what should not be said ."
Dear Harriet , I give myself joy of this .
Elinor was prevented from making any reply to this civil triumph , by the door ' s being thrown open , the servant ' s announcing Mr . Ferrars , and Edward ' s immediately walking in .
I can leave them at the Great House very well , for a month or six weeks .
If we were obliged to go out such an evening as this , by any call of duty or business , what a hardship we should deem it ;-- and here are we , probably with rather thinner clothing than usual , setting forward voluntarily , without excuse , in defiance of the voice of nature , which tells man , in every thing given to his view or his feelings , to stay at home himself , and keep all under shelter that he can ;-- here are we setting forward to spend five dull hours in another man ' s house , with nothing to say or to hear that was not said and heard yesterday , and may not be said and heard again to - morrow .
This is brilliant indeed !-- This is admirable !-- Excellently contrived , upon my word .
" We did , indeed , particularly so when he first arrived ."
But still I might not have believed it , for where the mind is perhaps rather unwilling to be convinced , it will always find something to support its doubts , if I had not , when the servant let me in today , accidentally seen a letter in his hand , directed to Mr . Willoughby in your sister ' s writing .
During all this time he was evidently struggling for composure .
The heat even would be danger .-- You are fatigued already ."
Anne found herself by this time growing so much more hardened to being in Captain Wentworth ' s company than she had at first imagined could ever be , that the sitting down to the same table with him now , and the interchange of the common civilities attending on it ( they never got beyond ), was become a mere nothing .
And it was not only that her feelings were still adverse to any man save one ; her judgement , on a serious consideration of the possibilities of such a case was against Mr Elliot .
We were only in anxiety and distress during the last two hours , and previously there had been a great deal of enjoyment .
Mrs . John Dashwood did not at all approve of what her husband intended to do for his sisters .
One day only had passed since Anne ' s conversation with Mrs Smith ; but a keener interest had succeeded , and she was now so little touched by Mr Elliot ' s conduct , except by its effects in one quarter , that it became a matter of course the next morning , still to defer her explanatory visit in Rivers Street .
But you will do every thing right .
They should lose her ; and , probably , in great measure , her husband also .-- Frank Churchill would return among them no more ; and Miss Fairfax , it was reasonable to suppose , would soon cease to belong to Highbury .
Tea passed pleasantly , and nobody seemed in a hurry to move .
I found Harriet more conversable than I expected ."
But they would have been improved by some share of his frankness and warmth ; and her visit was long enough to detract something from their first admiration , by shewing that , though perfectly well - bred , she was reserved , cold , and had nothing to say for herself beyond the most common - place inquiry or remark .
" I can have no pleasure while I see you in this state ."
I cannot make her attend to the value of the property .
He looked very well , not as if he had been suffering in health or spirits , and he talked of Uppercross , of the Musgroves , nay , even of Louisa , and had even a momentary look of his own arch significance as he named her ; but yet it was Captain Wentworth not comfortable , not easy , not able to feign that he was .
I do admire your patriotism .
There can be no doubt that Lady Russell and Anne were both occasionally thinking of Captain Benwick , from this time .
" I cannot imagine why they should suppose I should not like a long walk ," said Mary , as she went up stairs .
For Miss ----------, read Miss Smith .
Her feelings altered towards Emma .-- Offended , probably , by the little encouragement which her proposals of intimacy met with , she drew back in her turn and gradually became much more cold and distant ; and though the effect was agreeable , the ill - will which produced it was necessarily increasing Emma ' s dislike .
I know enough of music to speak decidedly on that point .
I do suspect he would not have had a pair of horses for himself , and that it was only as an excuse for assisting them ."
" Indeed !"
I have good reason to think -- indeed I have it from the best authority , or I should not repeat it , for otherwise it would be very wrong to say any thing about it -- but I have it from the very best authority -- not that I ever precisely heard Mrs . Ferrars say it herself -- but her daughter DID , and I have it from her -- That in short , whatever objections there might be against a certain -- a certain connection -- you understand me -- it would have been far preferable to her , it would not have given her half the vexation that THIS does .
I am sure I was very much surprized when I first heard she was going to be married ."
On each side of the entrance was a sitting room , about sixteen feet square ; and beyond them were the offices and the stairs .
She could not do so , without comparing herself with Miss Larolles , the inimitable Miss Larolles ; but still she did it , and not with much happier effect ; though by what seemed prosperity in the shape of an early abdication in her next neighbours , she found herself at the very end of the bench before the concert closed .
Miss Woodhouse , the comfort of being sometimes alone !"
She feared it was what every body else must think of and predict .
They have more gentleness .
She could say nothing .
Lucy was naturally clever ; her remarks were often just and amusing ; and as a companion for half an hour Elinor frequently found her agreeable ; but her powers had received no aid from education : she was ignorant and illiterate ; and her deficiency of all mental improvement , her want of information in the most common particulars , could not be concealed from Miss Dashwood , in spite of her constant endeavour to appear to advantage .
phoo !"
Common sense would have directed her to tell Harriet , that she must not allow herself to think of him , and that there were five hundred chances to one against his ever caring for her .--" But , with common sense ," she added , " I am afraid I have had little to do ."
Mr . Elton knows you ."
Each faulty propensity in leading him to evil , had led him likewise to punishment .
That his understanding has no brilliancy , his feelings no ardour , and his voice no expression ."
We have cleared away all the old thorns that grew in patches over the brow ."
Poor Edward !
" Ferrars !"
" We had better put it off .
Dear Harriet !-- I would not change you for the clearest - headed , longest - sighted , best - judging female breathing .
there is not much difference .
The event acquitted her of all the fancifulness , and all the selfishness of imaginary complaints .
Her manners gave some re - assurance to Edward , and he had courage enough to sit down ; but his embarrassment still exceeded that of the ladies in a proportion , which the case rendered reasonable , though his sex might make it rare ; for his heart had not the indifference of Lucy ' s , nor could his conscience have quite the ease of Elinor ' s .
" I rather doubt that .
Oh !
" I did ," said Elinor , with a composure of voice , under which was concealed an emotion and distress beyond any thing she had ever felt before .
I have heard him speak , and so must you , so very highly of Jane Fairfax !
Lady Middleton , though in the middle of a rubber , on being informed that Marianne was unwell , was too polite to object for a moment to her wish of going away , and making over her cards to a friend , they departed as soon the carriage could be found .
Elinor , dreading her being tired , led her towards home ; and till they reached the door of the cottage , easily conjecturing what her curiosity must be though no question was suffered to speak it , talked of nothing but Willoughby , and their conversation together ; and was carefully minute in every particular of speech and look , where minuteness could be safely indulged .
I thought of nothing but whether it might not be Colonel Brandon come back again ; so I said to Sir John , I do think I hear a carriage ; perhaps it is Colonel Brandon come back again "--
She had promised to be with the Musgroves from breakfast to dinner .
I think their father is too rough with them very often ."
She wondered , and questioned him eagerly ; but in vain .
The sweet scenes of autumn were for a while put by , unless some tender sonnet , fraught with the apt analogy of the declining year , with declining happiness , and the images of youth and hope , and spring , all gone together , blessed her memory .
She had great satisfaction in replying that she was going into Devonshire .-- Edward turned hastily towards her , on hearing this , and , in a voice of surprise and concern , which required no explanation to her , repeated , " Devonshire !
You only mean , that he intends it ."
yes -- Mr . Knightley and I both saying we liked it , and Mr . Elton ' s seeming resolved to learn to like it too .
After a short silence which succeeded the first surprise and enquiries of meeting , Marianne asked Edward if he came directly from London .
Perhaps just at present he may be undecided ; the smallness of your fortune may make him hang back ; his friends may all advise him against it .
More than I can recollect in a moment ; but I can tell you some .
" Wentworth ?
and could not seriously picture to herself a more agreeable or estimable man .
" Concealing it from us !
" Don ' t talk to me about heirs and representatives ," cried Charles .
No , you would not guess , from his way of writing , that he had ever thought of this Miss ( what ' s her name ?)
Lord bless me !-- I am sure it would put ME quite out of patience !-- And though one would be very glad to do a kindness by poor Mr . Ferrars , I do think it is not worth while to wait two or three months for him .
You can ' t think how much I longed to see you !
It was mere lively chat , such as any young persons , on an intimate footing , might fall into .
And how does your business go on ?
She wondered that Lucy ' s spirits could be so very much elevated by the civility of Mrs . Ferrars ;-- that her interest and her vanity should so very much blind her as to make the attention which seemed only paid her because she was NOT ELINOR , appear a compliment to herself -- or to allow her to derive encouragement from a preference only given her , because her real situation was unknown .
" Then you would be very ill - bred ," cried Mr . Palmer .
" Did he appear a sensible young man ; a young man of information ?"
He had explained away all the appearance of neglect on his own side .
If I had not promoted Mr . Weston ' s visits here , and given many little encouragements , and smoothed many little matters , it might not have come to any thing after all .
He tried to smile as he replied , " your sister ' s engagement to Mr . Willoughby is very generally known ."
I would give anything to know the truth of it .
One moment she feared that no serious design had ever been formed on his side ; and the next that some unfortunate quarrel had taken place between him and her sister ;-- the distress in which Marianne had quitted the room was such as a serious quarrel could most reasonably account for , though when she considered what Marianne ' s love for him was , a quarrel seemed almost impossible .
I am very sure myself , that had Willoughby turned out as really amiable , as he has proved himself the contrary , Marianne would yet never have been so happy with HIM , as she will be with Colonel Brandon ."
And the Middletons too , you must introduce me to THEM .
And that you should have been so mistaken , is amazing !-- I am sure , but for believing that you entirely approved and meant to encourage me in my attachment , I should have considered it at first too great a presumption almost , to dare to think of him .
" You know Miss Fairfax ' s situation in life , I conclude ; what she is destined to be ?"
He defended himself ; though professing that he would never willingly admit any ladies on board a ship of his , excepting for a ball , or a visit , which a few hours might comprehend .
" Oh no ;-- and it is but a short letter too ."
" You may certainly ask to be forgiven ," said Elinor , " because you have offended ;-- and I should think you might NOW venture so far as to profess some concern for having ever formed the engagement which drew on you your mother ' s anger ."
" My dear , how am I to get so far ?
It had no advantage of situation ; but had been very much smartened up by the present proprietor ; and , such as it was , there could be no possibility of the two friends passing it without a slackened pace and observing eyes .-- Emma ' s remark was --
" It is not to be conceived that a man of three or four - and - twenty should not have liberty of mind or limb to that amount .
" Ay , ay , Miss Louisa Musgrove , that is the name .
Mr . Frank Churchill to be making such a speech as that to the uncle and aunt , who have brought him up , and are to provide for him !-- Standing up in the middle of the room , I suppose , and speaking as loud as he could !-- How can you imagine such conduct practicable ?"
Emma must do Harriet good : and by supplying her with a new object of interest , Harriet may be said to do Emma good .
There were many things to be taken into the account .
I have been acting contrary to all my sense of right ; and the fortunate turn that every thing has taken , and the kindness I am now receiving , is what my conscience tells me ought not to be .'
The coming of her sister ' s family was so very near at hand , that first in anticipation , and then in reality , it became henceforth her prime object of interest ; and during the ten days of their stay at Hartfield it was not to be expected -- she did not herself expect -- that any thing beyond occasional , fortuitous assistance could be afforded by her to the lovers .
He was dining with the Randalls family , and Jane , at the Eltons '; and he had seen a look , more than a single look , at Miss Fairfax , which , from the admirer of Miss Woodhouse , seemed somewhat out of place .
Many counties , I believe , are called the garden of England , as well as Surry ."
Of very important , very recordable events , it was not more productive than such meetings usually are .
As she reflected more , she seemed but to feel it more .
" Well ;-- if _you_ wish me to stay and join the party , I will ."
Emma was just describing the nature of her friend ' s complaint ;-- " a throat very much inflamed , with a great deal of heat about her , a quick , low pulse , & c . and she was sorry to find from Mrs . Goddard that Harriet was liable to very bad sore - throats , and had often alarmed her with them ."
I admired your spirit ; and I dare say we shall get home very well .
Now , upon his father ' s marriage , it was very generally proposed , as a most proper attention , that the visit should take place .
" I have no doubt of their being happy together ," said Emma ; " I believe them to be very mutually and very sincerely attached ."
I am charged with a most agreeable office ( breathing rather faster than usual as she spoke .)
Colonel Brandon must be the man ; and no civility shall be wanting on my part to make him pleased with you and your family .
What is to become of that ?-- Very true .
" Mr . Martin !
Who cried most ?"
Here was a dangerous opening .
They are very important -- and sorry I am that you cannot feel them sufficiently to act upon them .
Could he have thought himself encouraged , his looks and language at parting would have been different .-- Still , however , I must be on my guard .
Is not it a good exchange ?-- You consent -- I hope you consent ?"
I come in for a pretty good share as a second .
He was arm - in - arm with Mr .
Your friend will not take it amiss I hope .
He was gone immediately ; and Emma soon saw him standing before Miss Fairfax , and talking to her ; but as to its effect on the young lady , as he had improvidently placed himself exactly between them , exactly in front of Miss Fairfax , she could absolutely distinguish nothing .
Her heart was hardened against the belief of Mrs . Jennings ' s entering into her sorrows with any compassion .
" Well ," said Mrs . Weston , laughing , " perhaps the greatest good he could do them , would be to give Jane such a respectable home ."
" There is no saying , indeed ," replied Harriet rather solemnly .
She was quite one of her worthies -- the most amiable , affable , delightful woman -- just as accomplished and condescending as Mrs . Elton meant to be considered .
He gave her to understand that he had looked at her with some earnestness .
" I knew pretty well what she was before that day ;" said he , smiling .
Captain Benwick and Louisa Musgrove !
" Nay , Sir Walter ," cried Mrs Clay , " this is being severe indeed .
it would have been a happy thing , if he had never left you .
I immediately saw that there could be no difficulty in it , so I said , ' My dear Lady Elliott , do not be uneasy .
How do you do , Miss Smith ?-- Very well I thank you .-- And I begged Mrs . Weston to come with me , that I might be sure of succeeding ."
They talked at first only of the performance .
I can support her myself .
" This ," said he , " cannot hold ; but a change , a total change of sentiments -- No , no , do not desire it ; for when the romantic refinements of a young mind are obliged to give way , how frequently are they succeeded by such opinions as are but too common , and too dangerous !
She had taken care to have the intelligence conveyed to herself , as soon as it was known that the ceremony was over , as she was desirous that Marianne should not receive the first notice of it from the public papers , which she saw her eagerly examining every morning .
She gave him a short account of her party and business at Lyme .
And I hope you may have as good luck yourself soon ,-- but perhaps you may have a friend in the corner already ."
Mr . Woodhouse talked over his alarms , and Emma was in spirits to persuade them away with all her usual promptitude .
An old married man -- quite good for nothing .
" Anne , Anne ," cried Charles , " What is to be done next ?
He never wished to attach me .
and Marianne , still talking wildly of mama , her alarm increased so rapidly , as to determine her on sending instantly for Mr . Harris , and despatching a messenger to Barton for her mother .
As bluntly as he could speak it , therefore , he told me that Marianne Dashwood was dying of a putrid fever at Cleveland -- a letter that morning received from Mrs . Jennings declared her danger most imminent -- the Palmers are all gone off in a fright , & c .-- I was too much shocked to be able to pass myself off as insensible even to the undiscerning Sir John .
He saw her concern , and coming to her , took her hand , pressed it , and kissed it with grateful respect .
" I am sorry to say , ma ' am , in a most unhappy rupture :-- Edward is dismissed for ever from his mother ' s notice .
We admired it so much , that I have ventured to write it into Miss Smith ' s collection .
And there can be no reason why you should not try for him .
She could only compare Mr Elliot to Lady Russell , in the wish of really comprehending what had passed , and in the degree of concern for what she must have suffered in witnessing it .
And then there was such comfort in the very easy distance of Randalls from Hartfield , so convenient for even solitary female walking , and in Mr . Weston ' s disposition and circumstances , which would make the approaching season no hindrance to their spending half the evenings in the week together .
And , pray , who is Charles Hayter ?
The wish of distinguishing her , as far as civility permitted , was very evident , though it could not often proceed beyond a look .
That very dear part of Emma , her fancy , received an amusing supply .
To this Elinor had no answer to make , and did not attempt any .
Winthrop , without beauty and without dignity , was stretched before them an indifferent house , standing low , and hemmed in by the barns and buildings of a farm - yard .
Cannot you invent a few hardships for yourself , and be contented to stay ?"
for , if we had met first in the drawing - room , I doubt whether you would have discerned me to be more of a gentleman than usual .-- You might not have distinguished how I came , by my look or manner ."
" More than you think it really and intrinsically worth ."
" But then , to be an old maid at last , like Miss Bates !"
Surely this comparison must have its use with her .
Emma would be " very happy to wait on Mrs . Bates , & c .," and they did at last move out of the shop , with no farther delay from Miss Bates than ,
Do not run away with such an idea ."
It was selfishness which first made him sport with your affections ; which afterwards , when his own were engaged , made him delay the confession of it , and which finally carried him from Barton .
But you know they were your own words , that _more_ wonderful things had happened , matches of _greater_ disparity had taken place than between Mr . Frank Churchill and me ; and , therefore , it seems as if such a thing even as this , may have occurred before -- and if I should be so fortunate , beyond expression , as to -- if Mr . Knightley should really -- if _he_ does not mind the disparity , I hope , dear Miss Woodhouse , you will not set yourself against it , and try to put difficulties in the way .
This was Mr . Elton !
" We spent such a day , Edward , in Harley Street yesterday !
She could easily conceive that marriage might not be immediately in their power ; for though Willoughby was independent , there was no reason to believe him rich .
_She_ certainly had not been in the wrong , and _he_ would never own that he had .
I have the highest opinion in the world of Edward ' s heart .
If Jemima were not the trustiest , steadiest creature in the world , it would be enough to spoil her ; for she tells me , they are always tempting her to take a walk with them ."
Fortune came , his prize - money as lieutenant being great ; promotion , too , came at last ; but Fanny Harville did not live to know it .
Dear Miss Woodhouse , he would be thirty years old !"
as to being Anne ' s acquaintance ," said Mary , " I think he is rather my acquaintance , for I have been seeing him every day this last fortnight ."
Their housekeeping will be nothing at all .
Suppose I go and invite Miss Bates to join us ?"
The breakfast - room chimney smokes a little , I grant you , but it is only when the wind is due north and blows hard , which may not happen three times a winter .
She doubted the sincerity of this assurance no more than he had doubted it himself , and she thought of it for her daughters ' sake with satisfaction , though as for herself she was persuaded that a much smaller provision than 7000L would support her in affluence .
The very thing that we have always been rather afraid of ; for we should not have liked to have her at such a distance from us , for months together -- not able to come if any thing was to happen .
She would not marry , even if she were asked by Mr . Knightley .
Marianne lifted up her eyes in astonishment , and Elinor conjectured that she might as well have held her tongue .
Marianne could speak HER happiness only by tears .
" Emma , I must once more speak to you as I have been used to do : a privilege rather endured than allowed , perhaps , but I must still use it .
Well THAT is an odd kind of delicacy !
What happiness it must be to her good old grandmother and excellent aunt , when she comes to visit them !
I will take my oath he never dropt a syllable of being tired of her , or of wishing to marry Miss Morton , or any thing like it .
" Do you dare to suppose me so great a blockhead , as not to know what a man is talking of ?-- What do you deserve ?"
" When the first of hers reached me ( as it immediately did , for I was in town the whole time ,) what I felt is -- in the common phrase , not to be expressed ; in a more simple one -- perhaps too simple to raise any emotion -- my feelings were very , very painful .-- Every line , every word was -- in the hackneyed metaphor which their dear writer , were she here , would forbid -- a dagger to my heart .
" Insufferable woman !"
Mrs . Churchill , after being disliked at least twenty - five years , was now spoken of with compassionate allowances .
But I am not afraid of your seeing what he writes ."
My dear , did you change your stockings ?"
A fine open sea , he says , and very pure air .
Indeed , to say the truth , I am convinced within myself that your father had no idea of your giving them any money at all .
Mr . and Mrs . John Knightley , from having been longer than usual absent from Surry , were exciting of course rather more than the usual interest .
CHAPTER II
For my part , I think they are vastly agreeable , provided they dress smart and behave civil .
A scheme , worthy of Mrs Wallis ' s understanding , by all accounts ; but my sensible nurse Rooke sees the absurdity of it .
And , after all , what is it you suspect him of ?"
And , without love , I am sure I should be a fool to change such a situation as mine .
Lady Russell let this pass , and only said in rejoinder , " I own that to be able to regard you as the future mistress of Kellynch , the future Lady Elliot , to look forward and see you occupying your dear mother ' s place , succeeding to all her rights , and all her popularity , as well as to all her virtues , would be the highest possible gratification to me .
She will be mistaken , however .
" I do not think it _is_ so very small .
She was debating within herself on the eligibility of beginning her story directly , or postponing it till Marianne were in stronger health ;-- and they crept on for a few minutes in silence .
He had been at the pains of consulting Mr . Perry , the apothecary , on the subject .
There was no promise ."
Elinor was very angry , but Marianne seemed entirely insensible of the sting ; for she calmly replied ,
Their first pause was at the Crown Inn , an inconsiderable house , though the principal one of the sort , where a couple of pair of post - horses were kept , more for the convenience of the neighbourhood than from any run on the road ; and his companions had not expected to be detained by any interest excited there ; but in passing it they gave the history of the large room visibly added ; it had been built many years ago for a ball - room , and while the neighbourhood had been in a particularly populous , dancing state , had been occasionally used as such ;-- but such brilliant days had long passed away , and now the highest purpose for which it was ever wanted was to accommodate a whist club established among the gentlemen and half - gentlemen of the place .
Good heavens !
When Mrs . Jennings came home , though she returned from seeing people whom she had never seen before , and of whom therefore she must have a great deal to say , her mind was so much more occupied by the important secret in her possession , than by anything else , that she reverted to it again as soon as Elinor appeared .
What !-- engaged to her all the winter -- before either of them came to Highbury ?"
My nephews and nieces !-- I shall often have a niece with me ."
well , that must be infinitely provoking !
On the contrary , every friend must be made still more her friend by them .
Her caution was thrown away .
I doubt whether my own sense would have corrected me without it ."
" What sort of looking man is Mr .
The bustle in the vestibule , as she passed along an inner lobby , assured her that they were already in the house .
" Frank was here in February for a fortnight ."
Having long had as much money as he could spend , nothing to wish for on the side of avarice or indulgence , he has been gradually learning to pin his happiness upon the consequence he is heir to .
He is one of the dullest young men that ever lived .
But poor Harriet could not follow .
Concern for her unhappiness , and respect for her fortitude under it , must strengthen every attachment .
After the first chat of pleasure he was silent ; and then , in a graver tone , began with ,
` Dearer , much dearer than ever .'
Soon afterwards Mr . Elton quitted them , and she could not but do him the justice of feeling that there was a great deal of sentiment in his manner of naming Harriet at parting ; in the tone of his voice while assuring her that he should call at Mrs . Goddard ' s for news of her fair friend , the last thing before he prepared for the happiness of meeting her again , when he hoped to be able to give a better report ; and he sighed and smiled himself off in a way that left the balance of approbation much in his favour .
He could now , without the drawback of a single unpleasant surmise , without a glance forward at any possible treachery in his guest , give way to all his natural kind - hearted civility in solicitous inquiries after Mr . Frank Churchill ' s accommodation on his journey , through the sad evils of sleeping two nights on the road , and express very genuine unmixed anxiety to know that he had certainly escaped catching cold -- which , however , he could not allow him to feel quite assured of himself till after another night .
There , not to be vulgar , was distinction , and merit .
" Undoubtedly ; and after all you have no thanks for it .
His property here , his place , his house , every thing is in such respectable and excellent condition !-- and his woods !-- I have not seen such timber any where in Dorsetshire , as there is now standing in Delaford Hanger !-- And though , perhaps , Marianne may not seem exactly the person to attract him -- yet I think it would altogether be advisable for you to have them now frequently staying with you , for as Colonel Brandon seems a great deal at home , nobody can tell what may happen -- for , when people are much thrown together , and see little of anybody else -- and it will always be in your power to set her off to advantage , and so forth ;-- in short , you may as well give her a chance -- You understand me ."
" There is no saying much for the delicacy of our good friends , the Eltons ," was his next observation .--" His feelings are natural .-- What !
Why was the evil so dreadfully increased by Harriet ' s having some hope of a return ?
The rest of Mrs . Palmer ' s sympathy was shewn in procuring all the particulars in her power of the approaching marriage , and communicating them to Elinor .
" Thank you , dear Miss Woodhouse , you are all kindness .-- It is impossible to say -- Yes , indeed , I quite understand -- dearest Jane ' s prospects -- that is , I do not mean .-- But she is charmingly recovered .-- How is Mr .
The weather affected Mr . Woodhouse , and he could only be kept tolerably comfortable by almost ceaseless attention on his daughter ' s side , and by exertions which had never cost her half so much before .
Little things do not irritate him .
Elinor was very earnest in her application to her mother , relating all that had passed , her suspicions of Willoughby ' s inconstancy , urging her by every plea of duty and affection to demand from Marianne an account of her real situation with respect to him .
Emma ' s answer was ready at the first word .
His wife hesitated a little , however , in giving her consent to this plan .
We must all feel for him ; and the more so , because it is totally out of our power to assist him ."
I merely called , because I would not pass the door without inquiring after Mrs . Bates ; but I have been so pleasantly detained !
But they live very comfortably .
What a blessing , that she never had any children !
I behaved shamefully .
But I am quite in the minority , I believe ; few people seem to value simplicity of dress ,-- show and finery are every thing .
With great indignation did he continue to observe him ; with great alarm and distrust , to observe also his two blinded companions .
A degree or two lower , and a creditable appearance might interest me ; I might hope to be useful to their families in some way or other .
Mamma says HE was in love with your sister too .-- I assure you it was a great compliment if he was , for he hardly ever falls in love with any body ."
Had you not been surrounded by other friends , I might have been tempted to introduce a subject , to ask questions , to speak more openly than might have been strictly correct .-- I feel that I should certainly have been impertinent ."
Were he ever able to get away , the day would be spent in coming and returning .
-- said Emma , still perplexed .
The folks of the Great House were to spend the evening of this day at the Cottage ; and it being now too late in the year for such visits to be made on foot , the coach was beginning to be listened for , when the youngest Miss Musgrove walked in .
There was a strange rumour in Highbury of all the little Perrys being seen with a slice of Mrs . Weston ' s wedding - cake in their hands : but Mr . Woodhouse would never believe it .
You will look back and see that I did not come till Miss Fairfax was in Highbury ; and as _you_ were the person slighted , you will forgive me instantly ; but I must work on my father ' s compassion , by reminding him , that so long as I absented myself from his house , so long I lost the blessing of knowing you .
Take your own ."
I was sitting near the door -- Elizabeth saw me directly ; but he did not ; he was busy with the umbrella .
" This is not right , Mr .
This will certainly be the beginning of one of our quarrels about Emma , Mr .
" Mr Elliot is an exceedingly agreeable man , and in many respects I think highly of him ," said Anne ; " but we should not suit ."
Lady Russell had only to listen composedly , and wish them happy , but internally her heart revelled in angry pleasure , in pleased contempt , that the man who at twenty - three had seemed to understand somewhat of the value of an Anne Elliot , should , eight years afterwards , be charmed by a Louisa Musgrove .
The gentlemen spoke of his horse .
I do not know whether he has any design of ingratiating himself with either of us , Harriet , by additional softness , but it strikes me that his manners are softer than they used to be .
" And make her like myself ."
With him it was most unnatural .
Do not you see that , at this instant , the very passage of her own letter , which sent me the report , is passing under her eye -- that the whole blunder is spread before her -- that she can attend to nothing else , though pretending to listen to the others ?"
I am losing all my bitterness against spoilt children , my dearest Emma .
His dancing proved to be just what she had believed it , extremely good ; and Harriet would have seemed almost too lucky , if it had not been for the cruel state of things before , and for the very complete enjoyment and very high sense of the distinction which her happy features announced .
So much was pretty soon understood ; but till Sir Walter and Elizabeth were walking Mary into the other drawing - room , and regaling themselves with her admiration , Anne could not draw upon Charles ' s brain for a regular history of their coming , or an explanation of some smiling hints of particular business , which had been ostentatiously dropped by Mary , as well as of some apparent confusion as to whom their party consisted of .
For thirteen years had she been doing the honours , and laying down the domestic law at home , and leading the way to the chaise and four , and walking immediately after Lady Russell out of all the drawing - rooms and dining - rooms in the country .
I have a very strong notion that it comes from him .
The hasty engagement she had entered into with that woman -- Here , my dear madam , I was obliged to leave off abruptly , to recollect and compose myself .-- I have been walking over the country , and am now , I hope , rational enough to make the rest of my letter what it ought to be .-- It is , in fact , a most mortifying retrospect for me .
His own enjoyment , or his own ease , was , in every particular , his ruling principle ."
One evening in particular , about a week after Colonel Brandon left the country , his heart seemed more than usually open to every feeling of attachment to the objects around him ; and on Mrs . Dashwood ' s happening to mention her design of improving the cottage in the spring , he warmly opposed every alteration of a place which affection had established as perfect with him .
" Brandon is just the kind of man ," said Willoughby one day , when they were talking of him together , " whom every body speaks well of , and nobody cares about ; whom all are delighted to see , and nobody remembers to talk to ."
" Poor creatures !
" Ill , very ill -- that is , if a young lady can ever be allowed to look ill .
It is tenderness of heart which makes my dear father so generally beloved -- which gives Isabella all her popularity .-- I have it not -- but I know how to prize and respect it .-- Harriet is my superior in all the charm and all the felicity it gives .
Anne will not be sorry to join us , I am sure .
" But , indeed , Elinor , it is Marianne ' s .
Well , by - and - by we shall have a few friends , and that will amuse her a little .
It was the only intelligible motive .
" Well , let me make haste and be gone .
But unwelcome as such a task must be , it was necessary to be done , and Elinor therefore hastened to perform it .
He understood what would be welcome ; he could be sure of little else .
Her regard was receiving strength by invariable praise of him , and her regrets kept alive , and feelings irritated by ceaseless repetitions of Miss Hawkins ' s happiness , and continual observation of , how much he seemed attached !-- his air as he walked by the house -- the very sitting of his hat , being all in proof of how much he was in love !
Heavens !
We must remember to let James know that the carriage will be wanted on Tuesday .
" The Admiralty ," he continued , " entertain themselves now and then , with sending a few hundred men to sea , in a ship not fit to be employed .
" It is one thing ," said she , presently -- her cheeks in a glow --" to have very good sense in a common way , like every body else , and if there is any thing to say , to sit down and write a letter , and say just what you must , in a short way ; and another , to write verses and charades like this ."
" Not yet ," cried the other , concealing her terror , and assisting Marianne to lie down again , " but she will be here , I hope , before it is long .
Observe her eyes , as she is looking up at my father .-- You will be glad to hear ( inclining his head , and whispering seriously ) that my uncle means to give her all my aunt ' s jewels .
I had no hesitation in advising him to marry .
" Ah !
I have now , as far as such a sentiment is allowable in human nature , nothing to reproach myself with ; and if I mistake not , a strong sense of duty is no bad part of a woman ' s portion ."
John , the second , is named after his father .
As soon as I could use my hands she taught me to knit , which has been a great amusement ; and she put me in the way of making these little thread - cases , pin - cushions and card - racks , which you always find me so busy about , and which supply me with the means of doing a little good to one or two very poor families in this neighbourhood .
" No , no !
YOUR sense of honour and honesty would have led you , I know , when aware of your situation , to attempt all the economy that would appear to you possible : and , perhaps , as long as your frugality retrenched only on your own comfort , you might have been suffered to practice it , but beyond that -- and how little could the utmost of your single management do to stop the ruin which had begun before your marriage ?-- Beyond THAT , had you endeavoured , however reasonably , to abridge HIS enjoyments , is it not to be feared , that instead of prevailing on feelings so selfish to consent to it , you would have lessened your own influence on his heart , and made him regret the connection which had involved him in such difficulties ?"
I cannot descend to be tricked out of assurances , that are not really wanted ."
Like half the rest of the world , if more than half there be that are clever and good , Marianne , with excellent abilities and an excellent disposition , was neither reasonable nor candid .
Mr . Weston must be quiet , and every thing deliberately arranged .
It is so delightful that you should live at the cottage !
.
If he were deficient there , nothing should make amends for it .
He may , at times , be able to do a great deal more than he can at others ."
The communicative lady I learnt , on inquiry , for I stayed in the shop till they were gone , was a Mrs . Ellison , and that , as I have been since informed , is the name of Miss Grey ' s guardian ."
Your sister wrote to me again , you know , the very next morning .
I bring a new proposal on the subject :-- a thought of my father ' s , which waits only your approbation to be acted upon .
" Being my friend ' s , I have no right to expose it in any degree to the public eye , but perhaps you may not dislike looking at it ."
Yes .
There was one , however , which Emma thought something of .-- The two last dances before supper were begun , and Harriet had no partner ;-- the only young lady sitting down ;-- and so equal had been hitherto the number of dancers , that how there could be any one disengaged was the wonder !-- But Emma ' s wonder lessened soon afterwards , on seeing Mr . Elton sauntering about .
" Yes , yes , THAT in particular .
" No , no ," said Emma , " it will not reckon low .
On its being proposed , Anne offered her services , as usual ; and though her eyes would sometimes fill with tears as she sat at the instrument , she was extremely glad to be employed , and desired nothing in return but to be unobserved .
I think him a very handsome young man , and his manners are precisely what I like and approve -- so truly the gentleman , without the least conceit or puppyism .
I am not more alarmed about little Charles now than he is .
In his preceding attempts to attach himself to Louisa Musgrove ( the attempts of angry pride ), he protested that he had for ever felt it to be impossible ; that he had not cared , could not care , for Louisa ; though till that day , till the leisure for reflection which followed it , he had not understood the perfect excellence of the mind with which Louisa ' s could so ill bear a comparison , or the perfect unrivalled hold it possessed over his own .
Mrs . Ferrars too -- in short it has been a scene of such complicated distress -- but I will hope that the storm may be weathered without our being any of us quite overcome .
There can be no want of gallantry , Admiral , in rating the claims of women to every personal comfort high , and this is what I do .
They joined company and proceeded together .
Let me not suppose that she dares go about , Emma Woodhouse - ing me !-- But upon my honour , there seems no limits to the licentiousness of that woman ' s tongue !"
" Pretty !
And , after proceeding a few steps , she added -- " I stopped you ungraciously , just now , Mr . Knightley , and , I am afraid , gave you pain .-- But if you have any wish to speak openly to me as a friend , or to ask my opinion of any thing that you may have in contemplation -- as a friend , indeed , you may command me .-- I will hear whatever you like .
The hills which surrounded the cottage terminated the valley in that direction ; under another name , and in another course , it branched out again between two of the steepest of them .
how can you think of such a thing ?
I always stand up for women -- and I assure you , if you knew how Selina feels with respect to sleeping at an inn , you would not wonder at Mrs . Churchill ' s making incredible exertions to avoid it .
She is known only as parlour - boarder at a common school .
Upon all points of blood and connexion he is a completely altered man .
I avoided the Middletons as much as possible , as well as everybody else who was likely to prove an acquaintance in common .
I an ' t the least astonished at it in the world , for I have often thought of late , there was nothing more likely to happen ."
I am very fond of hearing Miss Bates talk .
It was to herself an amusing and a very welcome piece of news , as proving that Mr . Elton could not have suffered long ; but she was sorry for Harriet : Harriet must feel it -- and all that she could hope was , by giving the first information herself , to save her from hearing it abruptly from others .
my dear , I wish you would not make matches and foretell things , for whatever you say always comes to pass .
These feelings rapidly restored his comfort , while Mrs . Weston , of a more apprehensive disposition , foresaw nothing but a repetition of excuses and delays ; and after all her concern for what her husband was to suffer , suffered a great deal more herself .
-- And Emma distinctly heard him add , in a lower tone , before he quitted the room ,--" I have been as good as my word .
After tea , Mr . and Mrs . Weston , and Mr . Elton sat down with Mr . Woodhouse to cards .
I should be sorry to have YOU ill ; you , that have been the greatest comfort to me in the world !-- Heaven knows what I should have done without your friendship ."
you know who I mean ."
Upon my word it is enough to put one in a fright .
The fever was over , and Emma could harbour little fear of the pulse being quickened again by injurious courtesy .
Arthur !-- How do you do ?
It was ten o ' clock .
Then , lowering her voice a little , she said to Elinor , " She is his natural daughter ."
Lord !
Mr . Elton was to take the drawing to London , chuse the frame , and give the directions ; and Emma thought she could so pack it as to ensure its safety without much incommoding him , while he seemed mostly fearful of not being incommoded enough .
Indeed a man could not very well be in love with either of her daughters , without extending the passion to her ; and Elinor had the satisfaction of seeing him soon become more like himself .
good Mr . Perry -- how is he , sir ?"
That is the fact , upon my honour , Mary knows it is ."
Then returning to his former earnest tone -- " My first wish for all whom I am interested in , is that they should be firm .
said Emma , recovering from her state of shame and feeling divided between wonder and amusement .
" Oh ," cried Marianne , " with what transporting sensation have I formerly seen them fall !
There is such perfect good - temper and good - will in Mr . Elton as one cannot but value ."
" I will tell her all that is necessary to what may comparatively be called , your justification .
Mrs . Elton then said , " Nobody can think less of dress in general than I do -- but upon such an occasion as this , when every body ' s eyes are so much upon me , and in compliment to the Westons -- who I have no doubt are giving this ball chiefly to do me honour -- I would not wish to be inferior to others .
I do not mean to complain , however ; it is undoubtedly a comfortable one , and I hope will in time be better .
Her health seemed for the moment completely deranged -- appetite quite gone -- and though there were no absolutely alarming symptoms , nothing touching the pulmonary complaint , which was the standing apprehension of the family , Mr . Perry was uneasy about her .
Come , Miss Marianne , let us strike hands upon the bargain , and if Miss Dashwood will change her mind by and bye , why so much the better ."
Anything was possible , anything might be defied rather than suspense .
Had I sat down to wish for any possible good to my family , I should have fixed on Colonel Brandon ' s marrying one of you as the object most desirable .
" Well , then , I know who it is from , Colonel .
And such a noble fire !-- I am quite roasted .
Emma looked graciously .
Anne and Henrietta , finding themselves the earliest of the party the next morning , agreed to stroll down to the sea before breakfast .
Here Mr . Weston joined them , and on hearing what was proposed , gave it his decided approbation .
said Mrs Musgrove , " it was a lucky day for us , when you were put captain into that ship .
" Miss Dashwood ," cried Willoughby , " you are now using me unkindly .
" Mrs . John Knightley is easily alarmed , and might be made unhappy about her sister ."
This is just what Perry said .
interposed Mrs . Jennings .
Let me hear any thing rather than what you are all thinking of .
I never spent a pleasanter morning in my life ."
so considerate !-- But however , she is so far from well , that her kind friends the Campbells think she had better come home , and try an air that always agrees with her ; and they have no doubt that three or four months at Highbury will entirely cure her -- and it is certainly a great deal better that she should come here , than go to Ireland , if she is unwell .
" Harriet !"
" Oh yes !
he replied , with an air of surprise .-- " No , my mother is in town ."
Husbands and wives generally understand when opposition will be vain .
There is safety in reserve , but no attraction .
My father would be well pleased if the gentlemen were richer , but he has no other fault to find .
She has a blister on one of her heels , as large as a three - shilling piece .
Had it been ten , Elinor would have been convinced that at that moment she heard a carriage driving up to the house ; and so strong was the persuasion that she DID , in spite of the ALMOST impossibility of their being already come , that she moved into the adjoining dressing - closet and opened a window shutter , to be satisfied of the truth .
Your case is a very unfortunate one ; you seem to me to be surrounded with difficulties , and you will have need of all your mutual affection to support you under them .
For a moment he was silent ; and then added , in a tone much more guarded and demure ,
Your secret is safe with me ; but pardon me if I express some surprise at so unnecessary a communication .
He stopped in his earnestness to look the question , and the expression of his eyes overpowered her .
He had gone beyond the sweep -- some way along the Highbury road -- the snow was nowhere above half an inch deep -- in many places hardly enough to whiten the ground ; a very few flakes were falling at present , but the clouds were parting , and there was every appearance of its being soon over .
asked Elizabeth .
Her ' s has been a very short one !
I am as confident of seeing Frank here before the middle of January , as I am of being here myself : but your good friend there ( nodding towards the upper end of the table ) has so few vagaries herself , and has been so little used to them at Hartfield , that she cannot calculate on their effects , as I have been long in the practice of doing ."
He is very little at Combe , I believe ; but if he were ever so much there , I do not think Mr . Palmer would visit him , for he is in the opposition , you know , and besides it is such a way off .
Mrs . Weston remained with Mr . Woodhouse .
Anne suppressed a smile , and listened kindly , while Mrs Musgrove relieved her heart a little more ; and for a few minutes , therefore , could not keep pace with the conversation of the others .
Sir Walter could not have borne the degradation of being known to design letting his house .
Serious she was , very serious in her thankfulness , and in her resolutions ; and yet there was no preventing a laugh , sometimes in the very midst of them .
" How can you say so , Anne ?"
Colonel Brandon was now as happy , as all those who best loved him , believed he deserved to be ;-- in Marianne he was consoled for every past affliction ;-- her regard and her society restored his mind to animation , and his spirits to cheerfulness ; and that Marianne found her own happiness in forming his , was equally the persuasion and delight of each observing friend .
" I wish ," said Henrietta , very well pleased with her companion , " I wish Lady Russell lived at Uppercross , and were intimate with Dr Shirley .
you are an odd creature !"
If I could persuade myself that my manners were perfectly easy and graceful , I should not be shy ."
He could not have come nearer to her if he would ; she was so surrounded and shut in : but she would rather have caught his eye .
cried Emma , " this has been a most unfortunate -- most deplorable mistake !-- What is to be done ?"
You wrote me word of it three months ago ."
They all united ; and , on reaching Hartfield gates , Emma , who knew it was exactly the sort of visiting that would be welcome to her father , pressed them all to go in and drink tea with him .
So surprised at their coming to town , though it was what she had rather expected all along ; so angry at their accepting her mother ' s invitation after having declined her own , though at the same time she would never have forgiven them if they had not come !
They were in Milsom Street .
But Elinor would not give her any encouragement to hope that she SHOULD tell her sister .
His recollection of Harriet , and the words which clothed it , the " beautiful little friend ," suggested to her the idea of Harriet ' s succeeding her in his affections .
It was a sweet view -- sweet to the eye and the mind .
" Well , my dear ," she cried , " I sent you up to the young man .
" It is certainly very well regulated ."
Harriet ' s claims to marry well are not so contemptible as you represent them .
--
But what is the meaning of this ?
With this inspiriting notion , her questions increased in number and meaning ; and she particularly led Harriet to talk more of Mr . Martin , and there was evidently no dislike to it .
The attachment , from which against honour , against feeling , against every better interest he had outwardly torn himself , now , when no longer allowable , governed every thought ; and the connection , for the sake of which he had , with little scruple , left her sister to misery , was likely to prove a source of unhappiness to himself of a far more incurable nature .
Marianne , who had seen him from the window , and who hated company of any kind , left the room before he entered it .
He felt it all , so much for her sake .
" Imprudent , if you please -- but not mad .
Whenever he had a touch of his old colicky gout , he said it did him more good than any thing else in the world .
However it might end , he was without any question their pleasantest acquaintance in Bath : she saw nobody equal to him ; and it was a great indulgence now and then to talk to him about Lyme , which he seemed to have as lively a wish to see again , and to see more of , as herself .
" I shall never be invited to Abbey - Mill again ," was said in rather a sorrowful tone .
Mr Musgrove was , in a lesser degree , affected likewise ; and when they reached the cottage , they were evidently in want , first , of being listened to anew on this subject , and afterwards , of all the relief which cheerful companions could give them .
But Marianne could no more satisfy him as to the colour of Mr . Willoughby ' s pointer , than he could describe to her the shades of his mind .
_There_ , indeed , lay real pleasure , for there she was giving up the sweetest hours of the twenty - four to his comfort ; and feeling that , unmerited as might be the degree of his fond affection and confiding esteem , she could not , in her general conduct , be open to any severe reproach .
And , by what I understand , you might have had lodgings there quite away from the sea -- a quarter of a mile off -- very comfortable .
I have an idea he was standing just here ."
" Let me entreat you ," cried Mr . Elton ; " it would indeed be a delight !
With the assistance of his mother - in - law , Sir John was not long in discovering that the name of Ferrars began with an F . and this prepared a future mine of raillery against the devoted Elinor , which nothing but the newness of their acquaintance with Edward could have prevented from being immediately sprung .
All his wishes centered in domestic comfort and the quiet of private life .
" I have not the least wish for it , I thank you ."
The promise was readily given , and Willoughby ' s behaviour during the whole of the evening declared at once his affection and happiness .
He caught her ."
Now nothing !
Such a woman as Jane Fairfax probably never fell in Mrs . Elton ' s way before -- and no degree of vanity can prevent her acknowledging her own comparative littleness in action , if not in consciousness ."
the coldness of a Jane Fairfax !-- Harriet is worth a hundred such -- And for a wife -- a sensible man ' s wife -- it is invaluable .
Her father was a grazier , her grandfather had been a butcher , but that was all nothing .
Time will generally lessen the interest of every attachment not within the daily circle -- but that is not the change I had in view for you .
The compliment was just returned , coldly and proudly ; and , under indescribable irritation of spirits , she was then conveyed to Hartfield .
" But Mrs . John Dashwood would not much approve of Edward ' s going into orders ."
They called for him in their way ; were all extremely amused ; and my brother asked him to dine with them the next day -- which he did -- and in the course of that visit ( as I understand ) he found an opportunity of speaking to Harriet ; and certainly did not speak in vain .-- She made him , by her acceptance , as happy even as he is deserving .
" A very serious sort , I assure you ;" still smiling .
Emma ' s comforts and hopes were most agreeably carried on , by Harriet ' s being to stay longer ; her fortnight was likely to be a month at least .
The Harvilles silenced all scruples ; and , as much as they could , all gratitude .
Her smile however changed to a sigh when she remembered that promise to Willoughby was yet unfulfilled , and feared she had that to communicate which might again unsettle the mind of Marianne , and ruin at least for a time this fair prospect of busy tranquillity .
Is not it what you have often wished to do yourself ?"
As she said this , she looked directly at her companion .
He does not think of the draught .
For an old built sloop , you would not see her equal .
" He was afraid they should have a very bad drive .
" My dear Isabella ,"-- exclaimed he hastily --" pray do not concern yourself about my looks .
The ivory , the gold , and the pearls , all received their appointment , and the gentleman having named the last day on which his existence could be continued without the possession of the toothpick - case , drew on his gloves with leisurely care , and bestowing another glance on the Miss Dashwoods , but such a one as seemed rather to demand than express admiration , walked off with a happy air of real conceit and affected indifference .
He seemed to have all the life and spirit , cheerful feelings , and social inclinations of his father , and nothing of the pride or reserve of Enscombe .
" Other great and inevitable expenses too we have had on first coming to Norland .
if I could but play as well as you and Miss Fairfax !"
I shall call hills steep , which ought to be bold ; surfaces strange and uncouth , which ought to be irregular and rugged ; and distant objects out of sight , which ought only to be indistinct through the soft medium of a hazy atmosphere .
He was rich , and being turned on shore , fully intended to settle as soon as he could be properly tempted ; actually looking round , ready to fall in love with all the speed which a clear head and a quick taste could allow .
And I think she feels it .
My brother had no regard for her ; his pleasures were not what they ought to have been , and from the first he treated her unkindly .
But , though discomfited and disappointed , he could still do something for his own interest and his own enjoyment .
It was an alarming change ; and Emma was thinking of it one morning , as what must bring a great deal to agitate and grieve her , when Mr . Knightley came in , and distressing thoughts were put by .
His genius and ardour had seemed to foresee and to command his prosperous path .
Now , my dear madam , I will release you ; but I could not conclude before .
Every qualification is raised at times , by the circumstances of the moment , to more than its real value ; and she was sometimes worried down by officious condolence to rate good - breeding as more indispensable to comfort than good - nature .
We seem so beset with difficulties on every side , that though it would make us miserable for a time , we should be happier perhaps in the end .
Your resolution , or rather your expectation of never marrying , results from an idea that the person whom you might prefer , would be too greatly your superior in situation to think of you .
" I promise you to make none for myself , papa ; but I must , indeed , for other people .
He paused for her assent and compassion ; and she forced herself to say ,
I am quite enough in love .
It is his own idea .
His manners , though serious , were mild ; and his reserve appeared rather the result of some oppression of spirits than of any natural gloominess of temper .
How Harriet could ever have had the presumption to raise her thoughts to Mr .
What do you take his age to be ?'
Had he wished ever to see her again , he need not have waited till this time ; he would have done what she could not but believe that in his place she should have done long ago , when events had been early giving him the independence which alone had been wanting .
yes , my dear , I dare say you might , because you know , the door was open , and the window was open , and Mr . Knightley spoke loud .
Sir John was a sportsman , Lady Middleton a mother .
` You _must_ _all_ spend your evening with us ,' said she --` I positively must have you _all_ come .'"
how shall you employ yourself when you grow old ?"
Instead of falling a sacrifice to an irresistible passion , as once she had fondly flattered herself with expecting ,-- instead of remaining even for ever with her mother , and finding her only pleasures in retirement and study , as afterwards in her more calm and sober judgment she had determined on ,-- she found herself at nineteen , submitting to new attachments , entering on new duties , placed in a new home , a wife , the mistress of a family , and the patroness of a village .
But unfortunately my own nicety , and the nicety of my friends , have made me what I am , an idle , helpless being .
Your uncle and aunt will never allow you to leave England ."
It grieved her to see the earnestness with which he often watched Marianne , and his spirits were certainly worse than when at Barton .
They arrived , the carriage turned , the step was let down , and Mr . Elton , spruce , black , and smiling , was with them instantly .
` In the name of heaven , who is that old fellow ?'
He looked with smiling penetration ; and , on receiving no answer , added , " _She_ ought not to be angry with you , I suspect , whatever he may be .-- To that surmise , you say nothing , of course ; but confess , Emma , that you did want him to marry Harriet ."
Mrs . Weston added , " that he could only allow himself time to hurry to Highbury , after breakfast , and take leave of the few friends there whom he could suppose to feel any interest in him ; and that he might be expected at Hartfield very soon ."
Mr . Wingfield told me that he has never known them more general or heavy -- except when it has been quite an influenza ."
It was an office in short , from which , unwilling to give Edward the pain of receiving an obligation from HER , she would have been very glad to be spared herself ;-- but Colonel Brandon , on motives of equal delicacy , declining it likewise , still seemed so desirous of its being given through her means , that she would not on any account make farther opposition .
" No , but it did not absolutely rain when I set out ."
.
I had no intention , I thought I had no power of staying more than five minutes , when I first entered the house .
" Ah !-- well -- to be sure .
I am not like Jane ; I wish I were .
It had no park , but the pleasure - grounds were tolerably extensive ; and like every other place of the same degree of importance , it had its open shrubbery , and closer wood walk , a road of smooth gravel winding round a plantation , led to the front , the lawn was dotted over with timber , the house itself was under the guardianship of the fir , the mountain - ash , and the acacia , and a thick screen of them altogether , interspersed with tall Lombardy poplars , shut out the offices .
I feel for him sincerely ."
" And I am sure , Sir ."
I cannot really change for the better .
" Are you going as high as Belmont ?
As Marianne ' s affection for her mother was sincere , it must triumph with little difficulty , over the imaginary evils she had started .
CHAPTER 27
I should not attempt it , if it were to be the means of inconvenience to the Highbury people , but if you call to mind exactly the present line of the path .
He could not then avoid it , but her touch seemed painful to him , and he held her hand only for a moment .
But I hardly know -- the misery that you have inflicted -- I hardly know what could have made it worse ."
She was still looking at him with the most speaking amazement .
She had come to Bath on that account , and was now in lodgings near the hot baths , living in a very humble way , unable even to afford herself the comfort of a servant , and of course almost excluded from society .
" I understand you .-- You do not suppose that I have ever felt much .-- For four months , Marianne , I have had all this hanging on my mind , without being at liberty to speak of it to a single creature ; knowing that it would make you and my mother most unhappy whenever it were explained to you , yet unable to prepare you for it in the least .-- It was told me ,-- it was in a manner forced on me by the very person herself , whose prior engagement ruined all my prospects ; and told me , as I thought , with triumph .-- This person ' s suspicions , therefore , I have had to oppose , by endeavouring to appear indifferent where I have been most deeply interested ;-- and it has not been only once ;-- I have had her hopes and exultation to listen to again and again .-- I have known myself to be divided from Edward for ever , without hearing one circumstance that could make me less desire the connection .-- Nothing has proved him unworthy ; nor has anything declared him indifferent to me .-- I have had to contend against the unkindness of his sister , and the insolence of his mother ; and have suffered the punishment of an attachment , without enjoying its advantages .-- And all this has been going on at a time , when , as you know too well , it has not been my only unhappiness .-- If you can think me capable of ever feeling -- surely you may suppose that I have suffered NOW .
" Fifty thousand pounds , my dear .
I wish Frederick would spread a little more canvass , and bring us home one of these young ladies to Kellynch .
If I could explain to you all this , and all that a man can bear and do , and glories to do , for the sake of these treasures of his existence !
I have been walking all this way in complete suspense .
Marianne was , of course , kept in ignorance of all these arrangements .
He had given it , he could assure her , very long and calm consideration ; he had been walking away from William Larkins the whole morning , to have his thoughts to himself .
" I will honestly tell you of one scheme which has lately come into my head , for bringing matters to bear ; indeed I am bound to let you into the secret , for you are a party concerned .
How she could have been so deceived !-- He protested that he had never thought seriously of Harriet -- never !
She would be very glad to stay ."
You will know it all in time .
_We_ must begin ; we must go and pay wedding visit very soon ."
Can I go anywhere for you , or with you ?
She was persuaded to believe the engagement a wrong thing : indiscreet , improper , hardly capable of success , and not deserving it .
He has loved her , my Elinor , ever since the first moment of seeing her ."
Elinor , who saw as plainly by this , as if she had seen the direction , that it must come from Willoughby , felt immediately such a sickness at heart as made her hardly able to hold up her head , and sat in such a general tremour as made her fear it impossible to escape Mrs . Jenning ' s notice .
Her spirits wanted the solitude and silence which only numbers could give .
She looked on with some amusement .-- Miss Bates ' s gratitude for Mrs . Elton ' s attentions to Jane was in the first style of guileless simplicity and warmth .
I knew how soon he would come ."
This lesson , she very much feared , they would receive only from herself ; she had little hope of Mr . Knightley , none of Mr . Weston .
It might have been an opportunity of watching the loves and jealousies of the four -- they were now altogether ; but she could stay for none of it .
Adopt her , educate her ."
" Miss Smith !-- oh !-- I had not observed .-- You are extremely obliging -- and if I were not an old married man .-- But my dancing days are over , Mrs . Weston .
" It was an awkward business , my dear , your spending the autumn at South End instead of coming here .
The naivete of Miss Smith ' s manners -- and altogether -- Oh , it is most admirable !
Happily , it was now time to be gone .
It gave to his intentions whatever of decision was wanting before ; and he finally resolved , that it would be absolutely unnecessary , if not highly indecorous , to do more for the widow and children of his father , than such kind of neighbourly acts as his own wife pointed out .
The party did not break up without Emma ' s being positively secured for the two first dances by the hero of the evening , nor without her overhearing Mr . Weston whisper to his wife , " He has asked her , my dear .
Here they were interrupted by the entrance of a third person , and Elinor withdrew to think it all over in private , to wish success to her friend , and yet in wishing it , to feel a pang for Willoughby .
Which of them is it ?-- I charge you by all that is sacred , not to attempt concealment ."
" She knows her own worth too well for false shame ," replied Edward .
But the rest , which one night entirely sleepless , and many hours of the most wearing anxiety seemed to make requisite , was kept off by irritation of spirits .
Six years of separation and suffering might have been spared .
They had too much sense to be desirable companions to the former ; and by the latter they were considered with a jealous eye , as intruding on THEIR ground , and sharing the kindness which they wanted to monopolize .
Quite wonderful how she does her hair !-- No hairdresser from London I think could .-- Ah !
Should she proceed no farther ?-- should she let it pass , and seem to suspect nothing ?-- Perhaps Harriet might think her cold or angry if she did ; or perhaps if she were totally silent , it might only drive Harriet into asking her to hear too much ; and against any thing like such an unreserve as had been , such an open and frequent discussion of hopes and chances , she was perfectly resolved .-- She believed it would be wiser for her to say and know at once , all that she meant to say and know .
Harriet listened submissively , and said " it was very true -- it was just as Miss Woodhouse described -- it was not worth while to think about them -- and she would not think about them any longer " but no change of subject could avail , and the next half - hour saw her as anxious and restless about the Eltons as before .
There was some anxiety mixed with Lady Russell ' s joy in meeting her .
I cannot remember the time when I did not love Eliza ; and my affection for her , as we grew up , was such , as perhaps , judging from my present forlorn and cheerless gravity , you might think me incapable of having ever felt .
I shall think you a great blockhead , Frank , if you bring the aunt without the niece ."
" Well , sir ," cried Mr . Weston , " as I took Miss Taylor away , it is incumbent on me to supply her place , if I can ; and I will step to Mrs . Goddard in a moment , if you wish it ."
But in time they will .
When Lady Middleton rose to go away , Mr . Palmer rose also , laid down the newspaper , stretched himself and looked at them all around .
And at others , what a heap of absurdities it is !
She has a fault .
" I should hope not ; but really when I look around among my acquaintance , I tremble .
are you never to hear yourself praised !-- Then you must be no friend of mine ; for those who will accept of my love and esteem , must submit to my open commendation ."
Emma did not find herself equal to give the pleased assent , which no doubt he was in the habit of receiving , to emulate the " Very true , my love ," which must have been usually administered by his travelling companion ; but she had resolution enough to refrain from making any answer at all .
Come , come , let ' s have no secrets among friends ."
Miss Bates ' s powerful , argumentative mind might have strengthened yours ."
CHAPTER 10
-- " He was generally thought so ."
I shall only just mention the circumstance to the others in a common way ."
" It would be impossible , I know ," replied Elinor , " to convince you that a woman of seven and twenty could feel for a man of thirty - five anything near enough to love , to make him a desirable companion to her .
[ To Mrs .
It will be quite delightful , I declare !
Charles ' s attentions to Henrietta had been observed by her father and mother without any disapprobation .
And what possible claim could the Miss Dashwoods , who were related to him only by half blood , which she considered as no relationship at all , have on his generosity to so large an amount .
It will be felt so great an attention !
Her eyes , a deep grey , with dark eye - lashes and eyebrows , had never been denied their praise ; but the skin , which she had been used to cavil at , as wanting colour , had a clearness and delicacy which really needed no fuller bloom .
" Yes , I made the best of it ; I always do : but I was very far from well at the time ; and I do not think I ever was so ill in my life as I have been all this morning : very unfit to be left alone , I am sure .
But as it is , it must be out of anybody ' s power to assist him .
Is every thing finally settled ?
" Oh !
" It is as well , perhaps , that I have not had the possibility .
certainly ," was his daughter ' s ; but Sir Walter ' s remark was , soon afterwards --
Captain Weston was a general favourite ; and when the chances of his military life had introduced him to Miss Churchill , of a great Yorkshire family , and Miss Churchill fell in love with him , nobody was surprized , except her brother and his wife , who had never seen him , and who were full of pride and importance , which the connexion would offend .
That , from such a quarter , one might expect .
I could not comprehend how .
I had imagined you were consulting me only as to the wording of it ."
" A mighty concession indeed !
" Have you any idea of Mr . Knightley ' s returning your affection ?"
" No , indeed !"
" And how could _she_ bear such behaviour !
The house , too , as described by Sir John , was on so simple a scale , and the rent so uncommonly moderate , as to leave her no right of objection on either point ; and , therefore , though it was not a plan which brought any charm to her fancy , though it was a removal from the vicinity of Norland beyond her wishes , she made no attempt to dissuade her mother from sending a letter of acquiescence .
I am amazingly glad you did not keep to YOUR WORD ."
Lady Elliott was delighted with the thought .
Mr . Churchill would never get over it ."
At last Miss Elliot and her friend , unattended but by the servant , ( for there was no cousin returned ), were walking off ; and Captain Wentworth , watching them , turned again to Anne , and by manner , rather than words , was offering his services to her .
He had left the girl whose youth and innocence he had seduced , in a situation of the utmost distress , with no creditable home , no help , no friends , ignorant of his address !
And extremely acceptable it is , for we must live at a great expense while we are here ."
But to appear happy when I am so miserable -- Oh !
It has been so many years my province to give advice , that you cannot be surprized , Mr . Knightley , at this little remains of office ."
That he might not be irritated into an absolute fever , by the fire which Mr . Woodhouse ' s tender habits required almost every evening throughout the year , he soon afterwards took a hasty leave , and walked home to the coolness and solitude of Donwell Abbey .
Emma was out of hearing .
" We will write the letter we were talking of , Harville , now , if you will give me materials ."
Emma found that it was not Mr . Weston ' s fault that the number of privy councillors was not yet larger .
I will only tell you what I have found him .
I wish I had looked at him more .
Elinor answered in some distress that she was , and then talked of head - aches , low spirits , and over fatigues ; and of every thing to which she could decently attribute her sister ' s behaviour .
--
" You are very good , I hope it won ' t hurt your eyes -- will you ring the bell for some working candles ?
What I am now doing indeed , seems nothing at all , since it can advance him so little towards what must be his principal , his only object of happiness .
Papa , if you speak in that melancholy way , you will be giving Isabella a false idea of us all .
Oh !
Marianne ' s feelings did not stop here .
Eight years and a half is a period ."
My brother did not deserve her ; he did not even love her .
Mrs . Palmer , on the contrary , who was strongly endowed by nature with a turn for being uniformly civil and happy , was hardly seated before her admiration of the parlour and every thing in it burst forth .
Marianne spoke inconsiderately what she really felt -- but when she saw how much she had pained Edward , her own vexation at her want of thought could not be surpassed by his .
There was consciousness , animation , and warmth ; there was every thing which her countenance or manner could ever have wanted .-- She came forward with an offered hand ; and said , in a low , but very feeling tone ,
Emma saw its artifice , and returned to her first surmises .
" You will not find her there .
There was not a dissentient voice on the subject , either when Mrs . Perry drank tea with Mrs . and Miss Bates , or when Mrs . and Miss Bates returned the visit .
Skilful has been the hand !"
This , as every thing else would have been , was too much for Marianne , who could only exclaim , in the anguish of her heart , " Oh !
For the present , adieu .
He must enter into all my feelings ; the same books , the same music must charm us both .
" If that is all , you may be satisfied already ,-- for Marianne DOES -- she has LONG forgiven you ."
" But , however , ONE thing must be considered .
She was far from depending on that result of his preference of her , which her mother and sister still considered as certain .
Now she could hear more ; and she trembled in expectation of it .
" Oh !
She opened the parlour door , and saw two gentlemen sitting with her father -- Mr . Weston and his son .
You alone have brought me to Bath .
Vanity , extravagance , love of change , restlessness of temper , which must be doing something , good or bad ; heedlessness as to the pleasure of his father and Mrs . Weston , indifferent as to how his conduct might appear in general ; he became liable to all these charges .
He seems perfectly unprepared for that ."
The change on Mrs . Elton ' s side soon afterwards appeared , and she was left in peace -- neither forced to be the very particular friend of Mrs . Elton , nor , under Mrs . Elton ' s guidance , the very active patroness of Jane Fairfax , and only sharing with others in a general way , in knowing what was felt , what was meditated , what was done .
I only want to know that Mr . Martin is not very , very bitterly disappointed ."
" She will not be surprized , papa , at least ."
The weather continued much the same all the following morning ; and the same loneliness , and the same melancholy , seemed to reign at Hartfield -- but in the afternoon it cleared ; the wind changed into a softer quarter ; the clouds were carried off ; the sun appeared ; it was summer again .
How angry and how diverted he would be !
I have a great regard for you and Emma ; but when it comes to the question of dependence or independence !-- At any rate , it must be better to have only one to please than two ."
Sir Walter made no objection , and Elizabeth did nothing worse than look cold and unconcerned .
When the visit was returned , Emma made up her mind .
Every door was now closed , the passage plan given up , and the first scheme of dancing only in the room they were in resorted to again ; and with such good - will on Frank Churchill ' s part , that the space which a quarter of an hour before had been deemed barely sufficient for five couple , was now endeavoured to be made out quite enough for ten .
I fancy I am rather a favourite ; he took notice of my gown .
There was no superiority of manner , accomplishment , or understanding .
I did not think Charles would have been so unfeeling .
It was now above a week since John Dashwood had called in Berkeley Street , and as since that time no notice had been taken by them of his wife ' s indisposition , beyond one verbal enquiry , Elinor began to feel it necessary to pay her a visit .-- This was an obligation , however , which not only opposed her own inclination , but which had not the assistance of any encouragement from her companions .
You have difficulties , and privations , and dangers enough to struggle with .
CHAPTER 7
The corner of the sofa is very good .
CHAPTER 36
As it was , he did nothing with much zeal , but sport ; and his time was otherwise trifled away , without benefit from books or anything else .
Elinor , however little concerned in it , joined in their discourse ; and Marianne , who had the knack of finding her way in every house to the library , however it might be avoided by the family in general , soon procured herself a book .
She had heard and seen it all ; and felt some curiosity to know whether the wet walk of this morning had produced any .
if he should be so far stimulated by your genius as to learn to draw himself , how delightful it would be !"
Who regards me ?"
But then you know , how should I guess such a thing ?
Frank Churchill returned to his station by Emma ; and as soon as Miss Bates was quiet , she found herself necessarily overhearing the discourse of Mrs . Elton and Miss Fairfax , who were standing a little way behind her .-- He was thoughtful .
asked Elizabeth .
Wait only till tomorrow ."
There is a littleness about him which you discovered , and which I did not : and I was fully convinced of his being in love with Harriet .
What am I to tell you ?
But he must not be addressing his reflections to Anne alone : he knew it ; he was soon diffused again among the others , and it was only at intervals that he could return to Lyme .
" There is no denying it ," he replied .
If he should have a numerous family , for instance , it would be a very convenient addition ."
mama , how spiritless , how tame was Edward ' s manner in reading to us last night !
" Pray , pray be composed ," cried Elinor , " and do not betray what you feel to every body present .
I have loved none but you .
There was a seriousness in Harriet ' s manner which prepared her , quite as much as her words , for something more than ordinary .
They gave themselves up wholly to their sorrow , seeking increase of wretchedness in every reflection that could afford it , and resolved against ever admitting consolation in future .
A few more to - morrows , and the party from London would be arriving .
Chapter 15
" You are not vain , Mr . Knightley .
And then sitting down again , she very soon forgot that there were any such things in the room .
said he , ` I do think I can fasten the rivet ; I like a job of this kind excessively .'
I did not understand you .
" Oh , you did ; well , and how do they all do at their house ?
It was a fine family - piece .
They were wretched comforters for one another ."
There can be no doubt of its having been of the greatest service to Dr Shirley , after his illness , last spring twelve - month .
Miss Woodhouse made the proper acquiescence ; and finding that nothing more was to be entrapped from any communication of Mrs . Cole ' s , turned to Frank Churchill .
And not all that could be urged to detain her succeeded .
" Oh , oh !"
` Oh !'
There will not be time for any thing ."
Emma laughed , and replied ,
Their mutual friend answered for the satisfaction which a visit from Miss Elliot would give Mrs Smith , and Anne therefore lost no time in going .
I dare say we shall be all safe at Hartfield before midnight ."
Mr . Knightley had a cheerful manner , which always did him good ; and his many inquiries after " poor Isabella " and her children were answered most satisfactorily .
Mrs . Weston laughed , and said he did not know what he was talking about .
but , Charles , tell Captain Wentworth , he need not be afraid of mentioning poor Dick before me , for it would be rather a pleasure to hear him talked of by such a good friend ."
" Both sir !
Warmth and tenderness of heart , with an affectionate , open manner , will beat all the clearness of head in the world , for attraction , I am sure it will .
Captain Wentworth , after being unseen and unheard of at Uppercross for two whole days , appeared again among them to justify himself by a relation of what had kept him away .
It is a great deal more natural than one could wish , that a young man , brought up by those who are proud , luxurious , and selfish , should be proud , luxurious , and selfish too .
I shall see you at the Abbey to - morrow morning I hope , and then we will look them over , and you shall give me your opinion ."
` Oh !'
The pleasantness of the morning had induced him to walk forward , and leave his horses to meet him by another road , a mile or two beyond Highbury -- and happening to have borrowed a pair of scissors the night before of Miss Bates , and to have forgotten to restore them , he had been obliged to stop at her door , and go in for a few minutes : he was therefore later than he had intended ; and being on foot , was unseen by the whole party till almost close to them .
Every one capable of thinking felt the advantage of the idea , and in a moment ( it was all done in rapid moments ) Captain Benwick had resigned the poor corpse - like figure entirely to the brother ' s care , and was off for the town with the utmost rapidity .
" Yes ," said John Knightley , " and I think we shall have a good deal of it ."
for the very moment Mr . Cole told Mrs . Cole of it , she sat down and wrote to me .
Another pause therefore of many minutes ' duration , succeeded this speech , and Lucy was still the first to end it .
very well ; time will explain ."
He made her no answer ; and only observed , after again examining the room , that it was very low pitched , and that the ceiling was crooked .
Everybody of any consequence or notoriety in Bath was well know by name to Mrs Smith .
A name that I am so very well acquainted with ; knew the gentleman so well by sight ; seen him a hundred times ; came to consult me once , I remember , about a trespass of one of his neighbours ; farmer ' s man breaking into his orchard ; wall torn down ; apples stolen ; caught in the fact ; and afterwards , contrary to my judgement , submitted to an amicable compromise .
He is fastidious and will have an affectation of his own ."
He began speaking of Harriet , and speaking of her with more voluntary praise than Emma had ever heard before .
An effort even yet lighter might have made her their friend .
If Colonel Campbell is not the person , who can be ?"
Tea was carrying round , and Mr . Weston , having said all that he wanted , soon took the opportunity of walking away .
What should a young fellow like you do ashore for half a year together ?
In fact , Anne could never see the crape round his hat , without fearing that she was the inexcusable one , in attributing to him such imaginations ; for though his marriage had not been very happy , still it had existed so many years that she could not comprehend a very rapid recovery from the awful impression of its being dissolved .
Marianne would have thought herself very inexcusable had she been able to sleep at all the first night after parting from Willoughby .
She gave her an answer which marked her contempt , and instantly left the room , resolving that , whatever might be the inconvenience or expense of so sudden a removal , her beloved Elinor should not be exposed another week to such insinuations .
It would hold the very number for comfort .
--
" No , no ,"-- he gravely replied .--" Don ' t ask me .
" You had better go on ," said she .
The morning that we parted too !
" You have given Miss Smith all that she required ," said he ; " you have made her graceful and easy .
Quite thick shoes .
She was now met by Mrs .
Lady Middleton looked as if she thanked heaven that SHE had never made so rude a speech .
" Dear , dear Elinor , don ' t mind them .
" Very well .
She introduced him to her friend , Miss Smith , and , at convenient moments afterwards , heard what each thought of the other .
But in this , our last interview of friendship , I approached her with a sense of guilt that almost took from me the power of dissembling .
She would not be frightened from paying him those attentions which , as a friend and almost a relation , were his due , by the observant eyes of Lucy , though she soon perceived them to be narrowly watching her .
At last Anne was at home again , and happier than any one in that house could have conceived .
" I cannot express my disappointment in having missed you the day before yesterday , nor my astonishment at not having received any answer to a note which I sent you above a week ago .
There was a kind of cold hearted selfishness on both sides , which mutually attracted them ; and they sympathised with each other in an insipid propriety of demeanor , and a general want of understanding .
She could thoroughly comprehend the sort of fascination he must possess over Lady Russell ' s mind , the difficulty it must be for her to withdraw her eyes , the astonishment she must be feeling that eight or nine years should have passed over him , and in foreign climes and in active service too , without robbing him of one personal grace !
What are Harriet Smith ' s claims , either of birth , nature or education , to any connexion higher than Robert Martin ?
Oh !
It really was so .
" I know you , I know you ; you would take up with any thing ; but I shall be a little more nice , and I am sure the good Campbells will be quite on my side ; with your superior talents , you have a right to move in the first circle .
About noon , however , she began -- but with a caution -- a dread of disappointment which for some time kept her silent , even to her friend -- to fancy , to hope she could perceive a slight amendment in her sister ' s pulse ;-- she waited , watched , and examined it again and again ;-- and at last , with an agitation more difficult to bury under exterior calmness , than all her foregoing distress , ventured to communicate her hopes .
" Kindest regards .
Emma got up on the morrow more disposed for comfort than she had gone to bed , more ready to see alleviations of the evil before her , and to depend on getting tolerably out of it .
my mother ' s spectacles .
when should I ever have thought of putting by in cotton a piece of court - plaister that Frank Churchill had been pulling about !
His daughter and Mrs Clay united in hinting that Colonel Wallis ' s companion might have as good a figure as Colonel Wallis , and certainly was not sandy - haired .
No !--( in an accent meant to be insinuating )-- I am sure you have seen and understood me ."
But I do not understand how the room at the Crown can be safer for you than your father ' s house ."
She wished she might be able to keep him from an absolute declaration .
-- But Mrs . Elton was very much discomposed indeed .--" Poor Knightley !
When your father and mother moved to Norland , though the furniture of Stanhill was sold , all the china , plate , and linen was saved , and is now left to your mother .
Only my pattern gown is at Hartfield .
" Oh !
He had never walked anywhere arm - in - arm with Colonel Wallis ( who was a fine military figure , though sandy - haired ) without observing that every woman ' s eye was upon him ; every woman ' s eye was sure to be upon Colonel Wallis ."
If we were all like you , I believe we might sit four .
He was tolerably cheerful .
Miss Morton , only daughter of the late Lord Morton , with thirty thousand pounds .
" That ' s right , my dear , very right .
I should not be helped so soon , but it smells most excellent , and I cannot help beginning ."
" But it is too far , indeed it is , to be walking quite alone .
Her mother ' s affliction was hardly less , and Elinor was the only one of the three , who seemed to consider the separation as any thing short of eternal .
-- What does this mean ?
YOU are my cousins , and they are my wife ' s , so you must be related ."
" I can explain this too ," cried Mrs Smith , smiling .
A very few to - morrows stood between the young people of Highbury and happiness .
I suppose you were very sorry to leave Sussex ."
" My dearest Harriet !"
Forcing herself to speak , therefore , in the hope of putting it by , she calmly said ,
CHAPTER IX
I , and only I , knew your heart and its sorrows ; yet to what did it influence me ?-- not to any compassion that could benefit you or myself .-- Your example was before me ; but to what avail ?-- Was I more considerate of you and your comfort ?
So I said I would go down and see , and Jane said , ` Shall I go down instead ?
She speedily comprehended all his merits ; the persuasion of his regard for Elinor perhaps assisted her penetration ; but she really felt assured of his worth : and even that quietness of manner , which militated against all her established ideas of what a young man ' s address ought to be , was no longer uninteresting when she knew his heart to be warm and his temper affectionate .
We copied it from the Elegant Extracts .
Can the old lady ?"
He had returned to a late dinner , and walked to Hartfield as soon as it was over .
She feared that under this persuasion she had been unjust , inattentive , nay , almost unkind , to her Elinor ;-- that Marianne ' s affliction , because more acknowledged , more immediately before her , had too much engrossed her tenderness , and led her away to forget that in Elinor she might have a daughter suffering almost as much , certainly with less self - provocation , and greater fortitude .
The name of Musgrove would have told him enough .
Their gentleness , their genuine attention to other people , and their manly unstudied simplicity is much more accordant with her real disposition , than the liveliness -- often artificial , and often ill - timed of the other .
The danger , however , was at present so unperceived , that they did not by any means rank as misfortunes with her .
Yet she soon began to rejoice that she had heard them .
She had soon the mortification of seeing Mr Elliot withdraw , and no one of proper condition has since presented himself to raise even the unfounded hopes which sunk with him .
HE , meanwhile , whatever he might feel , acted with all the firmness of a collected mind , made every necessary arrangement with the utmost despatch , and calculated with exactness the time in which she might look for his return .
Leave me , and go to him .
" I can answer for it that Miss Dashwood ' s is not ," said Mrs . Jennings , laughing heartily ; " for he is one of the modestest , prettiest behaved young men I ever saw ; but as for Lucy , she is such a sly little creature , there is no finding out who SHE likes ."
Could you have a motive for the trust , that was not honourable and flattering to me ?"
" I suspect they do not satisfy Mrs . Weston .
He was courting her week after week .
Upon the whole , she was equally contented with her view of his feelings .
One is sick of the very name of Jane Fairfax .
and his wife ' s persuading him to it , out of care for his health -- just what will happen , I have no doubt , some time or other ; only a little premature .
The promise , therefore , was given , and must be performed .
But no sooner was the distress known to Mr . Elton , than it was removed .
Mrs . Palmer laughed heartily at the recollection of their astonishment , and every body agreed , two or three times over , that it had been quite an agreeable surprise .
" Very well ," said Elizabeth , " I have nothing to send but my love .
Mrs Clay ' s selfishness was not so complicate nor so revolting as his ; and Anne would have compounded for the marriage at once , with all its evils , to be clear of Mr Elliot ' s subtleties in endeavouring to prevent it .
Brandon is one of them .
" Not for the world ," said Emma , smiling graciously , " would I advise you either way .
Mrs . Ferrars is certainly nothing to me at present -- but the time MAY come -- how soon it will come must depend upon herself -- when we may be very intimately connected ."
" What is it my dear friend ?
added Mrs Croft .
I do not mean to say that I am particularly observant or quick - sighted in general , but in such a case I am sure I could not be deceived ."
And not only did it appear that he was expected , and speedily , but the Musgroves , in their warm gratitude for the kindness he had shewn poor Dick , and very high respect for his character , stamped as it was by poor Dick ' s having been six months under his care , and mentioning him in strong , though not perfectly well - spelt praise , as " a fine dashing felow , only two perticular about the schoolmaster ," were bent on introducing themselves , and seeking his acquaintance , as soon as they could hear of his arrival .
So you may think what a blow it was to all her vanity and pride .
He then made his bow , and departed with the rest .
A thousand and a thousand thanks for all the kindness you have ever shewn me , and ten thousand for the attentions your heart will dictate towards her .-- If you think me in a way to be happier than I deserve , I am quite of your opinion .-- Miss W . calls me the child of good fortune .
" But did she tell you she was married , Thomas ?"
We are rather out of distance of the very striking beauties which attract the sort of parties you speak of ; and we are a very quiet set of people , I believe ; more disposed to stay at home than engage in schemes of pleasure ."
Lady Russell , convinced that Anne would not be allowed to be of any use , or any importance , in the choice of the house which they were going to secure , was very unwilling to have her hurried away so soon , and wanted to make it possible for her to stay behind till she might convey her to Bath herself after Christmas ; but having engagements of her own which must take her from Kellynch for several weeks , she was unable to give the full invitation she wished , and Anne though dreading the possible heats of September in all the white glare of Bath , and grieving to forego all the influence so sweet and so sad of the autumnal months in the country , did not think that , everything considered , she wished to remain .
In a country life I conceive it to be a sort of necessary ; for , let a woman have ever so many resources , it is not possible for her to be always shut up at home ;-- and very long walks , you know -- in summer there is dust , and in winter there is dirt ."
" And for your own sake too , or you are carrying your disinterestedness beyond reason ."
I hope he may long continue to feel all the value of such a reconciliation .-- He is a very liberal thanker , with his thousands and tens of thousands .--` Happier than I deserve .'
There was certainly no harm in his travelling sixteen miles twice over on such an errand ; but there was an air of foppery and nonsense in it which she could not approve .
Mr . Knightley seemed to be trying not to smile ; and succeeded without difficulty , upon Mrs . Elton ' s beginning to talk to him .
Now , though at first she will suffer much , I am sure she will soon become easier .
His appearance however was not unpleasing , in spite of his being in the opinion of Marianne and Margaret an absolute old bachelor , for he was on the wrong side of five and thirty ; but though his face was not handsome , his countenance was sensible , and his address was particularly gentlemanlike .
" Upon my honour ," said he very seriously , " it does not .
But I would not wish you to take the trouble of making any inquiries at present ."
Mrs . Elton took a great fancy to Jane Fairfax ; and from the first .
Could not have imagined it .-- So well lighted up !-- Jane , Jane , look !-- did you ever see any thing ?
And now to chuse the mortification of Mrs . Elton ' s notice and the penury of her conversation , rather than return to the superior companions who have always loved her with such real , generous affection ."
He ventured among them again , however , though his spirits certainly did not seem fit for the mirth of the party in general .
She knew a family near Maple Grove who had tried it , and been obliged to separate before the end of the first quarter .
" Well then ; I guess that Mr . Willoughby hunts ."
He took some music from a chair near the pianoforte , and turning to Emma , said ,
It was only the last time they met that he had offered him one of Folly ' s puppies !
Conceive what the events of a week have done in that family !
The visit was of course short ; and there was so much embarrassment and occupation of mind to shorten it , that Emma would not allow herself entirely to form an opinion of the lady , and on no account to give one , beyond the nothing - meaning terms of being " elegantly dressed , and very pleasing ."
Since he actually was expected in the country , she must teach herself to be insensible on such points .
Tell me if , when I returned to England in the year eight , with a few thousand pounds , and was posted into the Laconia , if I had then written to you , would you have answered my letter ?
Somebody else believed _Mrs_ .
I can see nothing at all extraordinary in him now .-- I do not care whether I meet him or not -- except that of the two I had rather not see him -- and indeed I would go any distance round to avoid him -- but I do not envy his wife in the least ; I neither admire her nor envy her , as I have done : she is very charming , I dare say , and all that , but I think her very ill - tempered and disagreeable -- I shall never forget her look the other night !-- However , I assure you , Miss Woodhouse , I wish her no evil .-- No , let them be ever so happy together , it will not give me another moment ' s pang : and to convince you that I have been speaking truth , I am now going to destroy -- what I ought to have destroyed long ago -- what I ought never to have kept -- I know that very well ( blushing as she spoke ).-- However , now I will destroy it all -- and it is my particular wish to do it in your presence , that you may see how rational I am grown .
" No ; but she might suppose that something would occur in your favour ; that your own family might in time relent .
I felt that , as to fortune , in all probability he might do much better ; and that as to a rational companion or useful helpmate , he could not do worse .
There will be enough of them , in all probability , to supply every sort of sensation that declining life can need .
They would be married , and settled either at or near Enscombe .
They were looking over views in Swisserland .
But farther than this you must not believe .
Lady Middleton expressed her sense of the affair about once every day , or twice , if the subject occurred very often , by saying , " It is very shocking , indeed !"
She found him , however , perfectly the gentleman in his behaviour to all his visitors , and only occasionally rude to his wife and her mother ; she found him very capable of being a pleasant companion , and only prevented from being so always , by too great an aptitude to fancy himself as much superior to people in general , as he must feel himself to be to Mrs . Jennings and Charlotte .
I declare I had no idea !
Now was the time for Mr . Frank Churchill to come among them ; and the hope strengthened when it was understood that he had written to his new mother on the occasion .
" Dear ma ' am , this kindness is quite unnecessary .
In the gayest and happiest spirits she set forward with her father ; not always listening , but always agreeing to what he said ; and , whether in speech or silence , conniving at the comfortable persuasion of his being obliged to go to Randalls every day , or poor Mrs . Weston would be disappointed .
Such a woman as I am sure Fanny will be glad to know .
" Good heavens , Charles !
It must be her ardent wish that Harriet might be disappointed ; and she hoped , that when able to see them together again , she might at least be able to ascertain what the chances for it were .-- She should see them henceforward with the closest observance ; and wretchedly as she had hitherto misunderstood even those she was watching , she did not know how to admit that she could be blinded here .-- He was expected back every day .
" Indeed !
It was not in compliment to Jane Fairfax however that he was so indifferent , or so indignant ; he was not guided by _her_ feelings in reprobating the ball , for _she_ enjoyed the thought of it to an extraordinary degree .
He hoped they would all excuse the smallness of the party , and could assure them it should never happen so again .
I have observed it all my life .
what a bloom of full health , and such a pretty height and size ; such a firm and upright figure !
" But if I do , I shall be crosser still .
Jane Fairfax was very elegant , remarkably elegant ; and she had herself the highest value for elegance .
" Get it all out of her , my dear .
She was still in the astonishment and confusion excited by her friend ' s penetration , unable to imagine how any report of Captain Wentworth could have reached her .
" What a pity it is , Elinor ," said Marianne , " that Edward should have no taste for drawing ."
" He had never seen so lovely a face , and was delighted with her naivete ."
" Do not you think , Miss Woodhouse , our saucy little friend here is charmingly recovered ?-- Do not you think her cure does Perry the highest credit ?--( here was a side - glance of great meaning at Jane .)
Do you know how Miss Bates and her niece came here ?"
Margaret and I shall be as much benefited by it as yourselves .
" M . D ."
Neither Lady Middleton nor Mrs . Jennings could supply to her the conversation she missed ; although the latter was an everlasting talker , and from the first had regarded her with a kindness which ensured her a large share of her discourse .
Mrs . Perry was very anxious that he should have a carriage , and came to my mother in great spirits one morning because she thought she had prevailed .
Jane she had a distinct glimpse of , looking extremely ill ; and , before the door had shut them out , she heard Miss Bates saying , " Well , my dear , I shall _say_ you are laid down upon the bed , and I am sure you are ill enough ."
" So do I .-- He is such a charming man , that it is quite a pity he should be so grave and so dull .
replied Elinor .
It will be as clean as Randalls by candlelight .
The neighbourhood of Brunswick Square is very different from almost all the rest .
His person and air were equal to what her fancy had ever drawn for the hero of a favourite story ; and in his carrying her into the house with so little previous formality , there was a rapidity of thought which particularly recommended the action to her .
I dare say she did not understand me ."
I deserved none .
" I have none of the usual inducements of women to marry .
-- Marianne was softened in a moment .
Materials were at hand , on a separate table ; he went to it , and nearly turning his back to them all , was engrossed by writing .
There was a great deal of friendly and of compassionate attachment on his side -- but no love .
I know it has .
" Westgate Buildings !"
Captain Harville had never been in good health since a severe wound which he received two years before , and Captain Wentworth ' s anxiety to see him had determined him to go immediately to Lyme .
" I shall never be easy till I have seen some of these places .
I knew who it came from .
I shall then go post ."
MY happiness never was his object ."
The slightest mention of anything relative to Willoughby overpowered her in an instant ; and though her family were most anxiously attentive to her comfort , it was impossible for them , if they spoke at all , to keep clear of every subject which her feelings connected with him .
" She would have turned back then , but for you ?"
if these are your only objections ," cried Mrs Smith , archly , " Mr Elliot is safe , and I shall give myself no more trouble about him .
When the Campbells are returned , we shall meet them in London , and continue there , I trust , till we may carry her northward .-- But now , I am at such a distance from her -- is not it hard , Miss Woodhouse ?-- Till this morning , we have not once met since the day of reconciliation .
" I could meet him no other way .
Should not the Colonel write himself ?-- sure , he is the proper person ."
Captain Benwick and Louisa Musgrove !
Upon Lady Russell ' s appearance soon afterwards , the whole party was collected , and all that remained was to marshal themselves , and proceed into the Concert Room ; and be of all the consequence in their power , draw as many eyes , excite as many whispers , and disturb as many people as they could .
Let me recommend Bath to you .
was her immediate exclamation .
A very little quiet reflection was enough to satisfy Emma as to the nature of her agitation on hearing this news of Frank Churchill .
" Certainly not ."
Elinor , smiling at the grave and decisive importance of her brother ' s tone , calmly replied ,
I could have wished , however , as you know , that you had seen Mr . Wingfield before you left home ."
But in this case , Anne had left nothing for advice to do ; and though Lady Russell , as satisfied as ever with her own discretion , never wished the past undone , she began now to have the anxiety which borders on hopelessness for Anne ' s being tempted , by some man of talents and independence , to enter a state for which she held her to be peculiarly fitted by her warm affections and domestic habits .
sir -- but a thoughtless young person will sometimes step behind a window - curtain , and throw up a sash , without its being suspected .
Edward returned to them with fresh admiration of the surrounding country ; in his walk to the village , he had seen many parts of the valley to advantage ; and the village itself , in a much higher situation than the cottage , afforded a general view of the whole , which had exceedingly pleased him .
my dear Miss Dashwood !
There had been a time , when of all the large party now filling the drawing - room at Uppercross , they would have found it most difficult to cease to speak to one another .
When that was once done , however , it was time for the raptures of Edward to cease ; for Marianne ' s joy hurried her into the drawing - room immediately .
It would be a disappointment to my father -- and altogether -- I do not know that -- I am rather of opinion that ten couple might stand here very well ."
They heard her with surprise .
It was soon Uppercross with him almost every day .
" And then , he saved her life .
That young lady , you know , that we have all been so concerned for .
Her voice was not unsteady ; but her mind was in all the perturbation that such a development of self , such a burst of threatening evil , such a confusion of sudden and perplexing emotions , must create .-- She listened with much inward suffering , but with great outward patience , to Harriet ' s detail .-- Methodical , or well arranged , or very well delivered , it could not be expected to be ; but it contained , when separated from all the feebleness and tautology of the narration , a substance to sink her spirit -- especially with the corroborating circumstances , which her own memory brought in favour of Mr . Knightley ' s most improved opinion of Harriet .
Ah !
More is avowedly due to _her_ .
Marianne ' s pianoforte was unpacked and properly disposed of ; and Elinor ' s drawings were affixed to the walls of their sitting room .
Do you suppose him really indifferent to her ?"
I hope she is well ?"
" The arrival of this pianoforte is decisive with me .
Can I be of any use ?"
" Your sister ," said he , with abruptness , a moment afterwards --" is out of danger .
When the gloves were bought , and they had quitted the shop again , " Did you ever hear the young lady we were speaking of , play ?"
There could be only the most proper alacrity , a most obliging compliance for public view ; and smiles reined in and spirits dancing in private rapture .
Frank comes to - morrow -- I had a letter this morning -- we see him to - morrow by dinner - time to a certainty -- he is at Oxford to - day , and he comes for a whole fortnight ; I knew it would be so .
" Not so large , I dare say , as many people suppose .
here ' s Miss Woodhouse .-- Dear Miss Woodhouse , how do you do ?-- Very well I thank you , quite well .
' Lord !'
Fanny looked very angry too , and her husband was all in a fright at his sister ' s audacity .
Mr . Perry is not gone ."
Mr . Knightley grew angry .
His countenance , as he entered the room , was not too happy , even for Elinor .
" We must ask Mr . and Mrs . Weston to dine with us , while Isabella is here ."
Well now , I think we had better turn back ; I am excessively tired ."
" Well , if you do not think it too late to give notice for yourself , suppose you were to go , as well as your husband .
Is he not a man of honour and feeling ?
It will be bad enough for the horses ."
I thought we HAD been safe ."
Had it been allowable entertainment , had there been no pain to her friend , or reproach to herself , in the waverings of Harriet ' s mind , Emma would have been amused by its variations .
" Oh !
" You are right .
Not that Emma was gay and thoughtless from any real felicity ; it was rather because she felt less happy than she had expected .
She determined to call upon them and seek safety in numbers .
Anne had a great deal to hear of Mr Elliot .
He was determined to make it by marriage .
Emma was in no danger of forgetting .
" Has no letter been left here for me since we went out ?"
Her aunt is a good creature , but , as a constant companion , must be very tiresome .
What wild imaginations one forms where dear self is concerned !
Poor Miss Bates may very likely have committed her niece and hurried her into a greater appearance of intimacy than her own good sense would have dictated , in spite of the very natural wish of a little change ."
Your friend Harriet will make a much longer history when you see her .-- She will give you all the minute particulars , which only woman ' s language can make interesting .-- In our communications we deal only in the great .-- However , I must say , that Robert Martin ' s heart seemed for _him_ , and to _me_ , very overflowing ; and that he did mention , without its being much to the purpose , that on quitting their box at Astley ' s , my brother took charge of Mrs . John Knightley and little John , and he followed with Miss Smith and Henry ; and that at one time they were in such a crowd , as to make Miss Smith rather uneasy ."
It is too unlikely , for me to believe it without proof ."
Though they had now been acquainted a month , she could not be satisfied that she really knew his character .
The two gentlemen arrived the next day to a very late dinner , affording a pleasant enlargement of the party , and a very welcome variety to their conversation , which a long morning of the same continued rain had reduced very low .
Now , how were his sentiments to be read ?
She turned towards Lucy in silent amazement , unable to divine the reason or object of such a declaration ; and though her complexion varied , she stood firm in incredulity , and felt in no danger of an hysterical fit , or a swoon .
I should like to know why you imagine I am ?"
She did not mean , however , to derive much more from it to gratify her vanity , than Mary might have allowed .
She could then see more and judge better .
Now there would be pleasure in her returning -- Every thing would be a pleasure .
And if that some one should be the very he whom , of all others , I could least bear -- but I will not stay to rob myself of all your compassionate goodwill , by shewing that where I have most injured I can least forgive .
But consider -- you need not be afraid of delegating power to _me_ .
Knightley !-- never seen him in her life before , and call him Knightley !-- and discover that he is a gentleman !
there I am -- thinking of him directly .
A thousand inquiries sprung up from her heart , but she dared not urge one .
Towards this home , she began on the approach of January to turn her thoughts , and thither she one day abruptly , and very unexpectedly by them , asked the elder Misses Dashwood to accompany her .
Precisely such had the paragraph originally stood from the printer ' s hands ; but Sir Walter had improved it by adding , for the information of himself and his family , these words , after the date of Mary ' s birth -- " Married , December 16 , 1810 , Charles , son and heir of Charles Musgrove , Esq .
There were the pencilled marks and memorandums on the wainscot by the window .
When their places were determined on , and they were all properly arranged , she looked round to see if he should happen to be in the same part of the room , but he was not ; her eye could not reach him ; and the concert being just opening , she must consent for a time to be happy in a humbler way .
Her start was perceptible only to herself ; but she instantly felt that she was the greatest simpleton in the world , the most unaccountable and absurd !
I regard Louisa Musgrove as a very amiable , sweet - tempered girl , and not deficient in understanding , but Benwick is something more .
Only three of us .-- besides dear Jane at present -- and she really eats nothing -- makes such a shocking breakfast , you would be quite frightened if you saw it .
Did you ever hear any thing so strange ?
" Good God !"
He laughed most immoderately .
" Certainly .
With all dear Emma ' s little faults , she is an excellent creature .
With some there was great joy at the sight of Frank Churchill ; others took it very composedly ; but there was a very general distress and disturbance on Miss Fairfax ' s disappearance being explained .
The comfort , the freedom , the gaiety of the room was over , hushed into cold composure , determined silence , or insipid talk , to meet the heartless elegance of her father and sister .
He is so very superior .
Dear Miss Elliot , may I not say father and son ?"
" He fancied that if he went with us , he should find you close by : he fancied everybody to be living in Uppercross ; and when he discovered that Lady Russell lived three miles off , his heart failed him , and he had not courage to come .
" Edward ' s love for me ," said Lucy , " has been pretty well put to the test , by our long , very long absence since we were first engaged , and it has stood the trial so well , that I should be unpardonable to doubt it now .
Stokes .-- Every body invited , was certainly to come ; Frank had already written to Enscombe to propose staying a few days beyond his fortnight , which could not possibly be refused .
Let us make the best of it -- and , indeed , almost every thing may be fairly said in her favour .
I mention no names ; but happy the man who changes Emma for Harriet !"
The party was to be our brother and sister , Henry , John -- and Miss Smith .
Colonel Campbell , you know , is quite our angel .
Elinor told him the number of the house .
She knew it well ; and she remembered another person ' s look also .
Mrs . Weston , did you ever hear the like ?
In my eyes it would be no marriage at all , but that would be nothing .
" Just as it should be ," said Mr . John Knightley , " and just as I hoped it was from your letters .
" To be sure you did .
But Charlotte , she would not be satisfied , so Mr . Donavan was sent for ; and luckily he happened to just come in from Harley Street , so he stepped over directly , and as soon as ever he saw the child , be said just as we did , that it was nothing in the world but the red gum , and then Charlotte was easy .
What his mother really is we cannot know ; but , from Fanny ' s occasional mention of her conduct and opinions , we have never been disposed to think her amiable ; and I am very much mistaken if Edward is not himself aware that there would be many difficulties in his way , if he were to wish to marry a woman who had not either a great fortune or high rank ."
Miss Fairfax ' s recent illness had offered a fair plea for Mrs . Weston to invite her to an airing ; she had drawn back and declined at first , but , on being pressed had yielded ; and , in the course of their drive , Mrs . Weston had , by gentle encouragement , overcome so much of her embarrassment , as to bring her to converse on the important subject .
So very good of them to send her the whole way !
No , Mr . Knightley , do not foretell vexation from that quarter ."
I do not say when , but perhaps you may guess where ;-- in the building in which N . takes M . for better , for worse ."
At first , while I supposed you satisfied that Colonel Campbell was the giver , I saw it only as paternal kindness , and thought it the most natural thing in the world .
Anne avoided a direct reply , but it was just the circumstance which she considered as not merely unnecessary to be communicated , but as what ought to be suppressed .
Mrs . Jennings had determined very early in the seizure that Marianne would never get over it , and Colonel Brandon , who was chiefly of use in listening to Mrs . Jennings ' s forebodings , was not in a state of mind to resist their influence .
" There were misunderstandings between them , Emma ; he said so expressly .
-- I remember that perfectly ."
" You are very obliging .
It was Garrick ' s , you know ."
So upon that , he smirked , and simpered , and looked grave , and seemed to know something or other , and at last he said in a whisper , ' For fear any unpleasant report should reach the young ladies under your care as to their sister ' s indisposition , I think it advisable to say , that I believe there is no great reason for alarm ; I hope Mrs . Dashwood will do very well .'"
They were going to take the two eldest boys to Astley ' s .
" Why should you imagine , Elinor , that we did not go there , or that we did not see the house ?
Life could do nothing for her , beyond giving time for a better preparation for death ; and that was given .
But , poor fellow !
But , Mr . Knightley , how could you possibly have heard it ?
This Emma felt was aimed at her ; and it made her quite angry .
They will be all wanting a home .
The wind roared round the house , and the rain beat against the windows ; but Elinor , all happiness within , regarded it not .
English verdure , English culture , English comfort , seen under a sun bright , without being oppressive .
CHAPTER 13
Mr . Elton was called out of the room before tea , old John Abdy ' s son wanted to speak with him .
Even if your own feelings were reluctant or indifferent , to consider what powerful supports would be his !
Oh , Willoughby , Willoughby , could this be yours !
The case is , you see , that the Campbells are going to Ireland .
You can imagine what an artful man would do ; and with this guide , perhaps , may recollect what you have seen him do ."
" It would be impossible to go to - morrow .
They , in their different homes , and their different ways , might be looking back on it with pleasure ; but in her view it was a morning more completely misspent , more totally bare of rational satisfaction at the time , and more to be abhorred in recollection , than any she had ever passed .
It is very good advice , and it shall have a better fate than your advice has often found ; for it shall be attended to ."
" I have been a good deal acquainted with him ," replied Mrs Smith , gravely , " but it seems worn out now .
But nobody heard , or , at least , nobody answered her .
CHAPTER VIII
" But you have not seen so much of the world as I have .
She had no scruple with regard to him .
and with the most perfect alacrity he welcomed the relationship , alluded to the past , and entreated to be received as an acquaintance already .
The insipidity of the meeting was exactly such as Elinor had expected ; it produced not one novelty of thought or expression , and nothing could be less interesting than the whole of their discourse both in the dining parlour and drawing room : to the latter , the children accompanied them , and while they remained there , she was too well convinced of the impossibility of engaging Lucy ' s attention to attempt it .
I had left her only the evening before , so fully , so firmly resolved within my self on doing right !
My dear Miss Woodhouse -- I come quite over - powered .
" Three o ' clock yesterday !
Twelve years were gone since they had parted , and each presented a somewhat different person from what the other had imagined .
cried Mrs . Jennings ; " Lord !
Emma turned away her head , divided between tears and smiles .
I should be quite in the way .
Your brother has gained my affections entirely , and as we could not live without one another , we are just returned from the altar , and are now on our way to Dawlish for a few weeks , which place your dear brother has great curiosity to see , but thought I would first trouble you with these few lines , and shall always remain ,
You will all be going soon I suppose ; the whole party breaking up .
The delightful emotions were a little subdued , when on stepping back from the group , to be joined again by Captain Wentworth , she saw that he was gone .
She believed every body found his manners pleasing ."
Their affection was always to subside into friendship .
And there was silence between them for a little while .
" Do you not think they are something in Miss Morton ' s style of painting , Ma ' am ?-- She DOES paint most delightfully !-- How beautifully her last landscape is done !"
Do not beat me ."
" Oh , yes ; and as like him as she can stare .
" All merged in my friendship , Sophia .
The hardness of the pavement for her feet , made him less willing upon the present occasion ; he did it , however .
Frank Churchill seemed to have been on the watch ; and though he did not say much , his eyes declared that he meant to have a delightful evening .
" Not quite ," returned Emma , with forced calmness , " for all that you then said , appeared to me to relate to a different person .
CHAPTER II
I wish you had been there to see her behaviour .
It is the greatest absurdity -- Actually snowing at this moment !-- The folly of not allowing people to be comfortable at home -- and the folly of people ' s not staying comfortably at home when they can !
He wanted to know how early he might be admitted to - morrow .
" That appears quite wonderful .
" Not before he was married , I suppose ?"
" Nay , Elinor , this reproach from YOU -- you who have confidence in no one !"
Our coachman and horses are so extremely expeditious !-- I believe we drive faster than any body .-- What a pleasure it is to send one ' s carriage for a friend !-- I understand you were so kind as to offer , but another time it will be quite unnecessary .
Ferrars ."
One shoulder of mutton , you know , drives another down .
" A straightforward , open - hearted man like Weston , and a rational , unaffected woman like Miss Taylor , may be safely left to manage their own concerns .
I could not leave it till Louisa ' s doing well was quite ascertained .
His opinion of Louisa Musgrove ' s inferiority , an opinion which he had seemed solicitous to give , his wonder at Captain Benwick , his feelings as to a first , strong attachment ; sentences begun which he could not finish , his half averted eyes and more than half expressive glance , all , all declared that he had a heart returning to her at least ; that anger , resentment , avoidance , were no more ; and that they were succeeded , not merely by friendship and regard , but by the tenderness of the past .
She was stronger alone , and her own good sense so well supported her , that her firmness was as unshaken , her appearance of cheerfulness as invariable , as with regrets so poignant and so fresh , it was possible for them to be .
" Then I must bid you farewell for a longer time than I should wish to do ."
But now I can carry her a most satisfactory account of both ."
" I do not see much sign of it .
why don ' t he repair it ?-- who should do it but himself ?"
How her temper and understanding might bear the investigation of his present keener time of life was another concern and rather a fearful one .
A dinner at Mr Musgrove ' s had been the occasion when all these things should have been seen by Anne ; but she had staid at home , under the mixed plea of a headache of her own , and some return of indisposition in little Charles .
The man must be a blockhead who wanted more .
I care for nothing else .
Mrs . Jennings soon came in .
And as for James , you may be very sure he will always like going to Randalls , because of his daughter ' s being housemaid there .
She soon caught his eye , and he immediately bowed , but without attempting to speak to her , or to approach Marianne , though he could not but see her ; and then continued his discourse with the same lady .
She could have said more on the subject ; for she had in fact so high an opinion of the Crofts , and considered her father so very fortunate in his tenants , felt the parish to be so sure of a good example , and the poor of the best attention and relief , that however sorry and ashamed for the necessity of the removal , she could not but in conscience feel that they were gone who deserved not to stay , and that Kellynch Hall had passed into better hands than its owners '.
It would be of no use to go to Uppercross again , for that other Miss Musgrove , I find , is bespoke by her cousin , the young parson .
how unhappy I make you !"
She often told herself it was folly , before she could harden her nerves sufficiently to feel the continual discussion of the Crofts and their business no evil .
I am by no means assured of his regard for me .
It is a retired place .
What has Mr . Frank Churchill done , to make you suppose him such an unnatural creature ?"
" I admired your resolution very much , sir ," said he , " in venturing out in such weather , for of course you saw there would be snow very soon .
" I am very glad you were well enough , and I hope you had a pleasant party ."
He had strong feelings of family attachment and family honour , without pride or weakness ; he lived with the liberality of a man of fortune , without display ; he judged for himself in everything essential , without defying public opinion in any point of worldly decorum .
" My dear ," said she , entering , " I have just recollected that I have some of the finest old Constantia wine in the house that ever was tasted , so I have brought a glass of it for your sister .
" Thank you , but I would rather you did not mention the subject to her ; till the time draws nearer , I do not wish to be giving any body trouble ."
He owed it to her , to risk any thing that might be involved in an unwelcome interference , rather than her welfare ; to encounter any thing , rather than the remembrance of neglect in such a cause .
It is bad for him , I know , to be shut up as he is ; but what can we do ?
I know what worthy people they are .
As Harriet now lived , the Martins could not get at her , without seeking her , where hitherto they had wanted either the courage or the condescension to seek her ; for since her refusal of the brother , the sisters never had been at Mrs . Goddard ' s ; and a twelvemonth might pass without their being thrown together again , with any necessity , or even any power of speech .
But Mrs . Dashwood could find explanations whenever she wanted them , which at least satisfied herself .
The misfortune of your birth ought to make you particularly careful as to your associates .
" Phoo !
had been a question of his .
Well , at last , as I need not tell you , you were forced on me ; and what a sweet figure I cut !-- what an evening of agony it was !-- Marianne , beautiful as an angel on one side , calling me Willoughby in such a tone !-- Oh , God !-- holding out her hand to me , asking me for an explanation , with those bewitching eyes fixed in such speaking solicitude on my face !-- and Sophia , jealous as the devil on the other hand , looking all that was -- Well , it does not signify ; it is over now .-- Such an evening !-- I ran away from you all as soon as I could ; but not before I had seen Marianne ' s sweet face as white as death .-- THAT was the last , last look I ever had of her ;-- the last manner in which she appeared to me .
The shock which her marriage had given me ," he continued , in a voice of great agitation , " was of trifling weight -- was nothing to what I felt when I heard , about two years afterwards , of her divorce .
It gave her no surprise that she saw nothing of Mrs . Palmer ; and as it gave her likewise no concern , she never mentioned her name .
While I , to blind the world to our engagement , was behaving one hour with objectionable particularity to another woman , was she to be consenting the next to a proposal which might have made every previous caution useless ?-- Had we been met walking together between Donwell and Highbury , the truth must have been suspected .-- I was mad enough , however , to resent .-- I doubted her affection .
But do not imagine that I want to influence you ."
I thought them particularly pleasing , and I will answer for it , they would generally please ."
He had gone away rejected and mortified -- disappointed in a very sanguine hope , after a series of what appeared to him strong encouragement ; and not only losing the right lady , but finding himself debased to the level of a very wrong one .
Anne found an unexpected interest here .
Finis
" There is no knowing what THEY may expect ," said the lady , " but we are not to think of their expectations : the question is , what you can afford to do ."
Poor little dears , how glad they will be to come .
The young people were all wild to see Lyme .
It is a beautiful moonlight night ; and so mild that I must draw back from your great fire ."
Anne ' s only surprise was , that affairs should be in forwardness enough for Henrietta ' s wedding - clothes to be talked of .
She could not be alone without feeling the full weight of their separate claims ; and how to guard the comfort of both to the utmost , was the question .
" True , true ," cried Mr . Knightley , with most ready interposition -- " very true .
All the privilege I claim for my own sex ( it is not a very enviable one ; you need not covet it ), is that of loving longest , when existence or when hope is gone ."
But you know what I am .-- You hear nothing but truth from me .-- I have blamed you , and lectured you , and you have borne it as no other woman in England would have borne it .-- Bear with the truths I would tell you now , dearest Emma , as well as you have borne with them .
The interest of two thousand pounds -- how can a man live on it ?-- and when to that is added the recollection , that he might , but for his own folly , within three months have been in the receipt of two thousand , five hundred a - year ( for Miss Morton has thirty thousand pounds ,) I cannot picture to myself a more wretched condition .
He did not know what they had best do .
I would give any money for it .
Men of sense , whatever you may chuse to say , do not want silly wives .
Though better endowed than the elder sister , Mary had not Anne ' s understanding nor temper .
She watched , observed , reflected , and finally determined that this was not a case of fortitude or of resignation only .
" Indeed , Mrs Smith , we must not expect to get real information in such a line .
" Then it can be no argument to prove that he is in love .
Elton ?"
" What should they do without her ?
To lose the possibility of speaking two words to Captain Wentworth in the course of her quiet , solitary progress up the town ( and she felt almost certain of meeting him ) could not be borne .
said she with all her accustomary complacency .
"' Tis because you are an indifferent person ," said Lucy , with some pique , and laying a particular stress on those words , " that your judgment might justly have such weight with me .
From thus listening and thinking , she was roused by a whisper of Mrs Musgrove ' s who , overcome by fond regrets , could not help saying --
We have had a very dull Christmas ; Mr and Mrs Musgrove have not had one dinner party all the holidays .
I need not so totally despair of an equal alliance , as to be addressing myself to Miss Smith !-- No , madam , my visits to Hartfield have been for yourself only ; and the encouragement I received --"
So very odd we should happen to meet !
She had never found it so difficult to listen to him , though nothing could exceed his solicitude and care , and though his subjects were principally such as were wont to be always interesting : praise , warm , just , and discriminating , of Lady Russell , and insinuations highly rational against Mrs Clay .
In that point , however , and that only , he erred ;-- for though Lucy soon gave him hopes that his eloquence would convince her in TIME , another visit , another conversation , was always wanted to produce this conviction .
Mrs . Weston again , and again , and again , you see .
Elinor was pleased that he had called ; and still more pleased that she had missed him .
asked Mr . Knightley .
" John enters like a brother into my happiness ," continued Mr . Knightley , " but he is no complimenter ; and though I well know him to have , likewise , a most brotherly affection for you , he is so far from making flourishes , that any other young woman might think him rather cool in her praise .
Before the middle of the day , they were visited by Sir John and Mrs . Jennings , who , having heard of the arrival of a gentleman at the cottage , came to take a survey of the guest .
Harriet is disgraced by any comparison .
We were speaking of it only yesterday , and agreeing how fortunate it was for Emma , that there should be such a girl in Highbury for her to associate with .
So mild and ladylike -- and with such talents !-- I assure you I think she has very extraordinary talents .
" That you may have less difficulty in believing this boast , of my present perfect indifference ," she continued , " I will farther tell you , that there was a period in the early part of our acquaintance , when I did like him , when I was very much disposed to be attached to him -- nay , was attached -- and how it came to cease , is perhaps the wonder .
He had met Mrs . Jennings at the door in her way to the carriage , as he came to leave his farewell card ; and she , after apologising for not returning herself , had obliged him to enter , by saying that Miss Dashwood was above , and wanted to speak with him on very particular business .
Oh !
Harriet blushed and smiled , and said something about wondering that people should like her so much .
However , I do not mean to say they have not a right to it .
The carriage -- we had disappointments about the carriage ;-- one morning , I remember , he came to me quite in despair ."
" I do not know whether it ought to be so , but certainly silly things do cease to be silly if they are done by sensible people in an impudent way .
And how much may be said in her situation for even that error !"
Your time has been properly and delicately spent , if you have been endeavouring for the last four years to bring about this marriage .
" When Frank left us ," continued he , " it was quite uncertain when we might see him again , which makes this day ' s news doubly welcome .
a great pity indeed !
" Oh God !
Miss Anne , if it had pleased Heaven to spare my poor son , I dare say he would have been just such another by this time ."
Here they were interrupted by the absolute necessity of Charles ' s following the others to admire mirrors and china ; but Anne had heard enough to understand the present state of Uppercross , and rejoice in its happiness ; and though she sighed as she rejoiced , her sigh had none of the ill - will of envy in it .
Emma and Harriet were going to walk ; he joined them ; and , on returning , they fell in with a larger party , who , like themselves , judged it wisest to take their exercise early , as the weather threatened rain ; Mr . and Mrs . Weston and their son , Miss Bates and her niece , who had accidentally met .
With a confidence in Mr Elliot ' s regard , more creditable to his feelings than his judgement , Mr Smith had appointed him the executor of his will ; but Mr Elliot would not act , and the difficulties and distress which this refusal had heaped on her , in addition to the inevitable sufferings of her situation , had been such as could not be related without anguish of spirit , or listened to without corresponding indignation .
" I did not thoroughly understand what you were telling your brother ," cried Emma , " about your friend Mr . Graham ' s intending to have a bailiff from Scotland , to look after his new estate .
Captain Harville smiled , as much as to say , " Do you claim that for your sex ?"
Emma knew that he was now getting to the Box Hill party , and grew uncomfortable .
And how could it possibly come into your head ?"
She hoped they might now become friends again .
I should be very sorry that such a friendship as has subsisted between him and Captain Benwick should be destroyed , or even wounded , by a circumstance of this sort ."
Her systems have all the unfortunate tendency of setting propriety at nought ; and a better acquaintance with the world is what I look forward to as her greatest possible advantage ."
He did really look and speak as if in a state of no common enjoyment .
" And when is Miss Fairfax to leave you ?"
Well , that is so very !-- I am sure if Jane is tired , you will be so kind as to give her your arm .-- Mr .
" I hope , Marianne ," continued Elinor , " you do not consider him as deficient in general taste .
He looked , as he spoke , to the seat which Mrs Clay had been lately occupying : a sufficient explanation of what he particularly meant ; and though Anne could not believe in their having the same sort of pride , she was pleased with him for not liking Mrs Clay ; and her conscience admitted that his wishing to promote her father ' s getting great acquaintance was more than excusable in the view of defeating her .
" You are very good .
" I confess that I do think there is a disparity , too great a disparity , and in a point no less essential than mind .
Sir John was delighted ; for to a man , whose prevailing anxiety was the dread of being alone , the acquisition of two , to the number of inhabitants in London , was something .
Why should he marry ?-- He is as happy as possible by himself ; with his farm , and his sheep , and his library , and all the parish to manage ; and he is extremely fond of his brother ' s children .
said he with a tender sigh , as he received it .
" A very fine young man indeed !"
We certainly do not forget you as soon as you forget us .
She persisted in a very determined , though very silent disinclination for Bath ; caught the first dim view of the extensive buildings , smoking in rain , without any wish of seeing them better ; felt their progress through the streets to be , however disagreeable , yet too rapid ; for who would be glad to see her when she arrived ?
She had no objection .
He sat a little while in doubt .
A sudden seizure of a different nature from any thing foreboded by her general state , had carried her off after a short struggle .
The Bath paper one morning announced the arrival of the Dowager Viscountess Dalrymple , and her daughter , the Honourable Miss Carteret ; and all the comfort of No .--, Camden Place , was swept away for many days ; for the Dalrymples ( in Anne ' s opinion , most unfortunately ) were cousins of the Elliots ; and the agony was how to introduce themselves properly .
The weather was most favourable for her ; though Christmas Day , she could not go to church .
" He had just looked into the dining - room , and as he was not wanted there , preferred being out of doors ."
There are on both sides good principles and good temper ."
" Bless me !"
But I dare say you will go for all that .
Mr . Perry could not quite understand him , but he was very sure there must be a _lady_ in the case , and he told him so ; and Mr . Elton only looked very conscious and smiling , and rode off in great spirits .
" My dear Mary , recollect what a comfortable account you sent me of yourself !
She had often observed the change , to almost the same extent .-- Harriet repeated expressions of approbation and praise from him -- and Emma felt them to be in the closest agreement with what she had known of his opinion of Harriet .
His rank in society I would alter if I could , which is saying a great deal I assure you , Emma .-- You laugh at me about William Larkins ; but I could quite as ill spare Robert Martin ."
His tall , firm , upright figure , among the bulky forms and stooping shoulders of the elderly men , was such as Emma felt must draw every body ' s eyes ; and , excepting her own partner , there was not one among the whole row of young men who could be compared with him .-- He moved a few steps nearer , and those few steps were enough to prove in how gentlemanlike a manner , with what natural grace , he must have danced , would he but take the trouble .-- Whenever she caught his eye , she forced him to smile ; but in general he was looking grave .
oh !
He is a clever man , a reading man ; and I confess , that I do consider his attaching himself to her with some surprise .
Elinor made what excuse she could for her .
I always forgot ."
After some attempts , therefore , to be permitted to begin again , they were obliged to thank Mrs . Weston , look sorrowful , and have done .
" So far as that it relates to Mr . Frank Churchill , I do guess ."
They had scarcely been two minutes by themselves , before he began to speak of Edward ; for he , too , had heard of the living , and was very inquisitive on the subject .
Consider , she is sitting down -- which naturally presents a different -- which in short gives exactly the idea -- and the proportions must be preserved , you know .
She had seen only Mrs . Martin and the two girls .
The evening of the very day on which they went brought a note from Mr . Elton to Mr . Woodhouse , a long , civil , ceremonious note , to say , with Mr . Elton ' s best compliments , " that he was proposing to leave Highbury the following morning in his way to Bath ; where , in compliance with the pressing entreaties of some friends , he had engaged to spend a few weeks , and very much regretted the impossibility he was under , from various circumstances of weather and business , of taking a personal leave of Mr . Woodhouse , of whose friendly civilities he should ever retain a grateful sense -- and had Mr . Woodhouse any commands , should be happy to attend to them ."
" How d ' ye do ?-- how d ' ye do ?-- Very well , I thank you .
I will have nothing to do with it .
cried the Admiral , " what stuff these young fellows talk !
Sometimes she could believe Willoughby to be as unfortunate and as innocent as herself , and at others , lost every consolation in the impossibility of acquitting him .
Every part of it brought pain and humiliation , of some sort or other ; but , compared with the evil to Harriet , all was light ; and she would gladly have submitted to feel yet more mistaken -- more in error -- more disgraced by mis - judgment , than she actually was , could the effects of her blunders have been confined to herself .
She was , besides , which was the worst of all , so cold , so cautious !
She had had many a hint from Mr . Knightley and some from her own heart , as to her deficiency -- but none were equal to counteract the persuasion of its being very disagreeable ,-- a waste of time -- tiresome women -- and all the horror of being in danger of falling in with the second - rate and third - rate of Highbury , who were calling on them for ever , and therefore she seldom went near them .
And it was entirely for HER sake , and upon HER account , that he said a word about being off , and not upon his own .
Colonel Brandon must have some information to give .
The night following this affair -- I was to go the next morning -- was spent by me in deliberating on what my future conduct should be .
Nothing should prevail on him to give up his engagement .
" No , no , no ," cried Marianne wildly , " he loves you , and only you .
The bare possibility of it acted as a farther irritation on her spirits ; and her being left in solitary grandeur , even supposing the omission to be intended as a compliment , was but poor comfort .
She was awake the whole night , and she wept the greatest part of it .
It was settled so , upon the hill , while we were walking about with Mr . Knightley .
To the possibility of motives unanswerable in themselves , though unavoidably secret for a while ?
" I am not fond of dinner - visiting ," said he --" I never was .
It will be a great deal better than leaving him only with Jemima .
it does happen very often , I assure you ; but my sister makes nothing of it ; she would as lieve be tossed out as not ."
She liked him -- in spite of his gravity and reserve , she beheld in him an object of interest .
Could the event of the disclosure bear an equal resemblance !-- But of that , unfortunately , there could be no chance .
" I cannot possibly do without Anne ," was Mary ' s reasoning ; and Elizabeth ' s reply was , " Then I am sure Anne had better stay , for nobody will want her in Bath ."
They had been a year or two waiting for fortune and promotion .
But this was a vain idea .
I cannot be forced into genius and eloquence ."
That was your doing , papa .
When he did perceive and acknowledge her , however , it was done with all his usual frankness and good humour .
" Ah !-- Indeed I am very sorry .-- Come , shake hands with me ."
CHAPTER 31
" Well , sir , and what said Mrs .
I never was more surprized -- but it does not make me unhappy , I assure you .-- How -- how has it been possible ?"
To take three thousand pounds from the fortune of their dear little boy would be impoverishing him to the most dreadful degree .
Now there is nothing grandmama loves better than sweetbread and asparagus -- so she was rather disappointed , but we agreed we would not speak of it to any body , for fear of its getting round to dear Miss Woodhouse , who would be so very much concerned !-- Well , this is brilliant !
She did not blame Lady Russell , she did not blame herself for having been guided by her ; but she felt that were any young person , in similar circumstances , to apply to her for counsel , they would never receive any of such certain immediate wretchedness , such uncertain future good .
William Larkins mentioned it here .
She dreaded the performance of it , dreaded what its effect on Marianne might be ; doubted whether after such an explanation she could ever be happy with another ; and for a moment wished Willoughby a widower .
" Yes ," he replied , and without the smallest apparent embarrassment .-- " But they would have done better had they given her notice of it .
Willoughby certainly does not deserve to be suspected .
how snug they might live in such another cottage as yours -- or a little bigger -- with two maids , and two men ; and I believe I could help them to a housemaid , for my Betty has a sister out of place , that would fit them exactly ."
" Why , to be sure ," said her husband , very gravely , " that would make great difference .
Yes , yes , if you please , no reference to examples in books .
And what does talking ever do you know ?"
" Well , Miss Dashwood ," said Mrs . Jennings , sagaciously smiling , as soon as the gentleman had withdrawn , " I do not ask you what the Colonel has been saying to you ; for though , upon my honour , I TRIED to keep out of hearing , I could not help catching enough to understand his business .
" Will you repeat to your sister when she is recovered , what I have been telling you ?-- Let me be a little lightened too in her opinion as well as in yours .
Lucy is monstrous pretty , and so good humoured and agreeable !
I should deserve utter contempt if I dared to suppose that true attachment and constancy were known only by woman .
Here ,-- probably this basket with pink ribbon .
I considered your marrying him as certain , though he might not yet have made the offer , and I could no more speak the truth of him , than if he had been your husband .
She thought of her father , of Lady Russell .
I shall speak a good word for you to all the young men , you may depend upon it ."
" Ah !"
you have found us out at last , have you , in our seclusion ?-- I was this moment telling Jane , I thought you would begin to be impatient for tidings of us ."
no -- far from it -- certainly plain .
" She is walking , I believe ."
Such was his own account at Randall ' s .
" I hope I shall soon have the pleasure of introducing my son to you ," said Mr . Weston .
Harriet ' s staying away so long was beginning to make her uneasy .
A room or two can easily be added ; and if my friends find no difficulty in travelling so far to see me , I am sure I will find none in accommodating them ."
He was in the Trafalgar action , and has been in the East Indies since ; he was stationed there , I believe , several years ."
I wanted her to stay at home and rest this morning , but she would come with us ; she longed so much to see you all !"
What a happy day for booksellers , music - sellers , and print - shops !
I do congratulate you , Mrs . Weston , most warmly .
But it seemed to satisfy Lucy , for she directly replied ,
How did Miss Campbell appear to like it ?"
It was now the middle of June , and the weather fine ; and Mrs . Elton was growing impatient to name the day , and settle with Mr . Weston as to pigeon - pies and cold lamb , when a lame carriage - horse threw every thing into sad uncertainty .
Here she took out her handkerchief ; but Elinor did not feel very compassionate .
When any two young people take it into their heads to marry , they are pretty sure by perseverance to carry their point , be they ever so poor , or ever so imprudent , or ever so little likely to be necessary to each other ' s ultimate comfort .
Do not be impatient , Emma ; it will all come out too soon ."
" Walter Elliot , born March 1 , 1760 , married , July 15 , 1784 , Elizabeth , daughter of James Stevenson , Esq .
He agreed that he might .
I only wonder that I am alive after what I have suffered for Edward ' s sake these last four years .
" Why will not you write one yourself for us , Mr .
There , however , he is quite mistaken .
" Oh God !
Sir John was ready to like anybody , and though Mr . Dashwood did not seem to know much about horses , he soon set him down as a very good - natured fellow : while Lady Middleton saw enough of fashion in his appearance to think his acquaintance worth having ; and Mr . Dashwood went away delighted with both .
As a counsellor she was not wanted ; but as an approver , ( a much safer character ,) she was truly welcome .
He should have respected even unreasonable scruples , had there been such ; but hers were all reasonable .
said Sir John .
The assistance he thought of , I dare say , was only such as might be reasonably expected of you ; for instance , such as looking out for a comfortable small house for them , helping them to move their things , and sending them presents of fish and game , and so forth , whenever they are in season .
" Mr Elliot does not dislike his cousin , I fancy ?"
It was every day implied , but never professedly declared .
He came .
I have had my doubts , I confess ; but they are fainter than they were , and they may soon be entirely done away .
Harriet , tempted by every thing and swayed by half a word , was always very long at a purchase ; and while she was still hanging over muslins and changing her mind , Emma went to the door for amusement .-- Much could not be hoped from the traffic of even the busiest part of Highbury ;-- Mr . Perry walking hastily by , Mr . William Cox letting himself in at the office - door , Mr . Cole ' s carriage - horses returning from exercise , or a stray letter - boy on an obstinate mule , were the liveliest objects she could presume to expect ; and when her eyes fell only on the butcher with his tray , a tidy old woman travelling homewards from shop with her full basket , two curs quarrelling over a dirty bone , and a string of dawdling children round the baker ' s little bow - window eyeing the gingerbread , she knew she had no reason to complain , and was amused enough ; quite enough still to stand at the door .
But I require no such proof .
Her ladyship ' s carriage was a barouche , and did not hold more than four with any comfort .
He would then have suffered under the pecuniary distresses which , because they are removed , he now reckons as nothing .
" Harriet may not consider every body tiresome that you would ."
She knew her sister ' s temper .
said Mrs . Weston , " have not you finished it yet ?
" Wait for his having a living !-- ay , we all know how THAT will end :-- they will wait a twelvemonth , and finding no good comes of it , will set down upon a curacy of fifty pounds a - year , with the interest of his two thousand pounds , and what little matter Mr . Steele and Mr . Pratt can give her .-- Then they will have a child every year !
It will be taking out my freedom .-- I dare say they sell gloves ."
I always say this is quite one of the evils of matrimony ."
I should have thought your last impressions of Lyme must have been strong disgust ."
Charles , in the meanwhile , was very decidedly declaring his resolution of calling on his aunt , now that he was so near ; and very evidently , though more fearfully , trying to induce his wife to go too .
I have just received my dispatches , and taken my farewell of Allenham ; and by way of exhilaration I am now come to take my farewell of you ."
William did not seem to mind it himself , he was so pleased to think his master had sold so many ; for William , you know , thinks more of his master ' s profit than any thing ; but Mrs . Hodges , he said , was quite displeased at their being all sent away .
It was a commission to touch every favourite feeling .
Oh !
How directly , how strongly had he expressed himself to her on the subject !-- Not too strongly for the offence -- but far , far too strongly to issue from any feeling softer than upright justice and clear - sighted goodwill .-- She had no hope , nothing to deserve the name of hope , that he could have that sort of affection for herself which was now in question ; but there was a hope ( at times a slight one , at times much stronger ,) that Harriet might have deceived herself , and be overrating his regard for _her_ .-- Wish it she must , for his sake -- be the consequence nothing to herself , but his remaining single all his life .
" Ah !-- so you say ; but I cannot believe it ."
At ten o ' clock , she trusted , or at least not much later her mother would be relieved from the dreadful suspense in which she must now be travelling towards them .
" No , indeed , I shall grant you nothing .
Elton !-- no wonder that you have such a curiosity to see him ."
Marianne coloured , and replied very hastily , " Where , pray ?"
But I gave what I believed the general opinion , when I called him plain ."
You cannot go to town till tomorrow , Brandon , that is all ."
" By feeling that I was doing my duty .-- My promise to Lucy , obliged me to be secret .
She read what made her wretched .
Mary knew , from Charles ' s manner of speaking , that he was quite determined on going , and that it would be of no use to teaze him .
But then , Mrs . Goddard will want to see it .-- And I could take the pattern gown home any day .
Oh !
" Mrs . Elton , I suppose , has been the person to whom Miss Fairfax owes --"
It was a great consolation that Mr . Elton should not be really in love with her , or so particularly amiable as to make it shocking to disappoint him -- that Harriet ' s nature should not be of that superior sort in which the feelings are most acute and retentive -- and that there could be no necessity for any body ' s knowing what had passed except the three principals , and especially for her father ' s being given a moment ' s uneasiness about it .
I am making a conundrum .
" Oh !
Mr . Palmer made her no answer , and did not even raise his eyes from the newspaper .
Opposition on so tender a subject would only attach her the more to her own opinion .
Knightley .--" Robert Martin ' s manners have sense , sincerity , and good - humour to recommend them ; and his mind has more true gentility than Harriet Smith could understand ."
But now she made the sudden resolution of not passing their door without going in -- observing , as she proposed it to Harriet , that , as well as she could calculate , they were just now quite safe from any letter from Jane Fairfax .
" Good Heaven !"
It is on her account that attention to Randalls is doubly due , and she must doubly feel the omission .
The Enscombe family were not in town quite so soon as had been imagined , but he was at Highbury very soon afterwards .
Mrs . Dashwood and her daughters were met at the door of the house by Sir John , who welcomed them to Barton Park with unaffected sincerity ; and as he attended them to the drawing room repeated to the young ladies the concern which the same subject had drawn from him the day before , at being unable to get any smart young men to meet them .
It was a happy circumstance , and animated Mr . Woodhouse for some time .
cried Elinor , " what do you mean ?
But I mean , that I was right in submitting to her , and that if I had done otherwise , I should have suffered more in continuing the engagement than I did even in giving it up , because I should have suffered in my conscience .
As it was impossible , however , now to prevent their coming , Lady Middleton resigned herself to the idea of it , with all the philosophy of a well - bred woman , contenting herself with merely giving her husband a gentle reprimand on the subject five or six times every day .
He sends us a sack every year ; and certainly there never was such a keeping apple anywhere as one of his trees -- I believe there is two of them .
It seemed as if her eyes were suddenly opened , and she were enabled to see that Mr . Elton was not the superior creature she had believed him .
Anne named them all .
Even _your_ satisfaction I made sure of .
Where did he live ?
It was agitation , pain , pleasure , a something between delight and misery .
You will be under the care of a motherly good sort of woman , of whose kindness to you I can have no doubt .
Mrs . Weston looked surprized , and said , " I did not know that he ever had any such plan ."
" Such sweet lines !"
I was sixteen years old when you were born ."
Quite delightful to have you all meet so !-- Our little room so honoured !"
At Hartfield , you have had very good specimens of well educated , well bred men .
Vague wishes of getting Sarah thither , had occurred before to Mrs Musgrove and Henrietta ; but without Anne , it would hardly have been resolved on , and found practicable so soon .
where shall we sit ?
I hope whenever poor Isabella ' s little ones have the measles , she will send for Perry ."
I thought it my duty as a friend , and older than yourself , to say thus much to you .
From that moment she doubted not of their being engaged to each other ; and the belief of it created no other surprise than that she , or any of their friends , should be left by tempers so frank , to discover it by accident .
But happily , either Anne was improved in plumpness and looks , or Lady Russell fancied her so ; and Anne , in receiving her compliments on the occasion , had the amusement of connecting them with the silent admiration of her cousin , and of hoping that she was to be blessed with a second spring of youth and beauty .
" I cannot make a question , or listen to a question about that .
Anywhere , so that Jane is not in a draught .
" Not at all , not at all ; there is not an oath or a murmur from beginning to end ."
And then to turn the discourse , she began admiring the house and the furniture .
And when one considers the variety of hands , and of bad hands too , that are to be deciphered , it increases the wonder ."
" Very soon , very soon , indeed ; that ' s the worst of it .
" But she will be gained by some one else .
However , I dare say we should have seen a great deal of him in Somersetshire , if it had not happened very unluckily that we should never have been in the country together .
One natural consequence of the evil she had involved herself in ," she said , " was that of making her _unreasonable_ .
" It is all very strange .
He re - urged -- she re - declined ; and he seemed then about to make his bow , when taking the paper from the table , she returned it --
( Laughing affectedly .)
" And I am changed also ; for I am now very willing to grant you all Harriet ' s good qualities .
thought Emma , " he would have done as much for Harriet ."
" Just as they always do -- very vulgar ."
They never miss a concert ."
Take my word for it , that , if I am alive , I shall be paying a visit at Delaford Parsonage before Michaelmas ; and I am sure I sha ' nt go if Lucy an ' t there ."
If all took place that might take place among the circle of her friends , Hartfield must be comparatively deserted ; and she left to cheer her father with the spirits only of ruined happiness .
In each letter he had spoken well of his captain ; but yet , so little were they in the habit of attending to such matters , so unobservant and incurious were they as to the names of men or ships , that it had made scarcely any impression at the time ; and that Mrs Musgrove should have been suddenly struck , this very day , with a recollection of the name of Wentworth , as connected with her son , seemed one of those extraordinary bursts of mind which do sometimes occur .
She sat an hour with me on Monday evening , and gave me the whole history ."
Miss Carteret , with still less to say , was so plain and so awkward , that she would never have been tolerated in Camden Place but for her birth .
He would be always coming over .
She felt that something must be the matter .
The delightful assurance of her total indifference towards Frank Churchill , of her having a heart completely disengaged from him , had given birth to the hope , that , in time , he might gain her affection himself ;-- but it had been no present hope -- he had only , in the momentary conquest of eagerness over judgment , aspired to be told that she did not forbid his attempt to attach her .-- The superior hopes which gradually opened were so much the more enchanting .-- The affection , which he had been asking to be allowed to create , if he could , was already his !-- Within half an hour , he had passed from a thoroughly distressed state of mind , to something so like perfect happiness , that it could bear no other name .
It was his idea to bring her to Hartfield : he had thought of no other place .
" But for my mother ' s sake and mine --"
Indeed , I must do ourselves the justice to say , that the few alterations we have made have been all very much for the better .
The hint was immediately taken up by Mr Shepherd , whose interest was involved in the reality of Sir Walter ' s retrenching , and who was perfectly persuaded that nothing would be done without a change of abode .
An arch look expressed --" I understand you well enough ;" but she said only , " Miss Fairfax is reserved ."
And under such a supposition , which would have been most miserable , when time had disclosed all , too late ?
It would never do .
This is meeting quite in fairy - land !-- Such a transformation !-- Must not compliment , I know ( eyeing Emma most complacently )-- that would be rude -- but upon my word , Miss Woodhouse , you do look -- how do you like Jane ' s hair ?-- You are a judge .-- She did it all herself .
" I would rather be talking to you ," he replied ; " but as it seems a matter of justice , it shall be done ."
The original was all her own -- her own happy thoughts and gentle diction .
To amuse her , and be agreeable in her eyes , seemed all that he cared for -- and Emma , glad to be enlivened , not sorry to be flattered , was gay and easy too , and gave him all the friendly encouragement , the admission to be gallant , which she had ever given in the first and most animating period of their acquaintance ; but which now , in her own estimation , meant nothing , though in the judgment of most people looking on it must have had such an appearance as no English word but flirtation could very well describe .
But I cannot believe it of you .
He was the brother of her friends , and he took pains to please her ; and altogether , having seen nobody better ( that must have been his great assistant ) she might not , while she was at Abbey - Mill , find him disagreeable .
Anne , amused in spite of herself , was rather distressed for an answer , and the Admiral , fearing he might not have been civil enough , took up the subject again , to say --
" I can listen no longer in silence .
He insisted , moreover , on conveying all their letters to and from the post for them , and would not be denied the satisfaction of sending them his newspaper every day .
he cried , " you would !
As soon as Mrs . Weston was sufficiently recovered to admit Mr . Woodhouse ' s visits , Emma having it in view that her gentle reasonings should be employed in the cause , resolved first to announce it at home , and then at Randalls .-- But how to break it to her father at last !-- She had bound herself to do it , in such an hour of Mr . Knightley ' s absence , or when it came to the point her heart would have failed her , and she must have put it off ; but Mr . Knightley was to come at such a time , and follow up the beginning she was to make .-- She was forced to speak , and to speak cheerfully too .
After a few moments ' chat , John Dashwood , recollecting that Fanny was yet uninformed of her sister ' s being there , quitted the room in quest of her ; and Elinor was left to improve her acquaintance with Robert , who , by the gay unconcern , the happy self - complacency of his manner while enjoying so unfair a division of his mother ' s love and liberality , to the prejudice of his banished brother , earned only by his own dissipated course of life , and that brother ' s integrity , was confirming her most unfavourable opinion of his head and heart .
By this time the report of the accident had spread among the workmen and boatmen about the Cobb , and many were collected near them , to be useful if wanted , at any rate , to enjoy the sight of a dead young lady , nay , two dead young ladies , for it proved twice as fine as the first report .
I am sure your mother can spare you very well , and I DO beg you will favour me with your company , for I ' ve quite set my heart upon it .
" It is very true ," said Marianne , " that admiration of landscape scenery is become a mere jargon .
The vulgar freedom and folly of the eldest left her no recommendation , and as Elinor was not blinded by the beauty , or the shrewd look of the youngest , to her want of real elegance and artlessness , she left the house without any wish of knowing them better .
Mr . Weston certainly would never marry again .
Chapter 1
He asked me if he could do any thing .
That was the wind - up of the history ; that was the glory of Miss Hawkins .
" None ; not one .
"` Mr .
She knew the importance of it , and said every thing in her power to do it away .
I hope we shall have many sweet little concerts together .
The course of true love never did run smooth --
No .
" Well , if he have nothing else to recommend him , he will be a treasure at Highbury .
The following morning Anne was out with her friend , and for the first hour , in an incessant and fearful sort of watch for him in vain ; but at last , in returning down Pulteney Street , she distinguished him on the right hand pavement at such a distance as to have him in view the greater part of the street .
NOW especially there cannot be -- but however , you and Marianne were always great favourites .-- Why would not Marianne come ?"
She never stopt till she had gone through the whole ; and though it was impossible not to feel that he had been wrong , yet he had been less wrong than she had supposed -- and he had suffered , and was very sorry -- and he was so grateful to Mrs . Weston , and so much in love with Miss Fairfax , and she was so happy herself , that there was no being severe ; and could he have entered the room , she must have shaken hands with him as heartily as ever .
" By many -- by some of whom you know nothing , by others with whom you are most intimate , Mrs . Jennings , Mrs . Palmer , and the Middletons .
His good looks and his rank had one fair claim on his attachment ; since to them he must have owed a wife of very superior character to any thing deserved by his own .
No , no ; she has qualities which may be trusted ; she will never lead any one really wrong ; she will make no lasting blunder ; where Emma errs once , she is in the right a hundred times ."
Has Colonel Brandon been with you lately ?"
Charles Hayter was the eldest of all the cousins , and a very amiable , pleasing young man , between whom and Henrietta there had been a considerable appearance of attachment previous to Captain Wentworth ' s introduction .
" You have been long acquainted with Colonel Brandon , have not you ?"
That is the reason of her writing out of rule , as we call it ; for , in the common course , we should not have heard from her before next Tuesday or Wednesday ."
" Aye , that will be much best ," said Harriet , quite satisfied , " I should not at all like to have it sent to Mrs .
" Jane Fairfax is absolutely charming , Miss Woodhouse .-- I quite rave about Jane Fairfax .-- A sweet , interesting creature .
Ford .-- " Yes -- no -- yes , to Mrs . Goddard ' s .
" Very few .
you thought nobody could dance because a certain person that shall be nameless is gone !"
Mrs . Dixon has persuaded her father and mother to come over and see her directly .
Have you ," she continued , after a short silence , " ever seen Mr . Willoughby since you left him at Barton ?"
Mr . Elton was the only one whose assistance she asked .
And how could it be supposed that his uncle and aunt would spare him again ?'
It has been completely unexpected .
No symptoms worse than before had appeared .
I made sure of its being nothing but a common love letter , and you know young people like to be laughed at about them .
He had just read Elton ' s letter as I was shewn in , and handed it to me directly ."
Ashamed of being otherwise .
Her own situation gained in the comparison ; for while she could ESTEEM Edward as much as ever , however they might be divided in future , her mind might be always supported .
She had only navy lists and newspapers for her authority , but she could not doubt his being rich ; and , in favour of his constancy , she had no reason to believe him married .
But , my dear , we must touch up the Colonel to do some thing to the parsonage , and make it comfortable for them , before Lucy goes to it ."
With such sensations , Mr . Elton ' s civilities were dreadfully ill - timed ; but she had the comfort of appearing very polite , while feeling very cross -- and of thinking that the rest of the visit could not possibly pass without bringing forward the same information again , or the substance of it , from the open - hearted Mr .
` I am sure you must be ,' said he , ` and I will send you another supply ; for I have a great many more than I can ever use .
The decree is issued by somebody .
Mrs . Elton , very willing to suppose a particular compliment intended her by such a hope , smiled most graciously .
why yourselves , and the Careys , and Whitakers to be sure .-- What !
" But with a strange kind of tenderness , if he can leave her with such indifference , such carelessness of the future , as you attribute to him ."
Their house was undoubtedly the best in Camden Place ; their drawing - rooms had many decided advantages over all the others which they had either seen or heard of , and the superiority was not less in the style of the fitting - up , or the taste of the furniture .
They were laying themselves open to that very phrase -- and to having it sent off in a letter to Maple Grove by one lady , to Ireland by another .
I thought him very plain at first , but I do not think him so plain now .
This was Sir Walter and Elizabeth ' s share of interest in the letter ; when Mrs Clay had paid her tribute of more decent attention , in an enquiry after Mrs Charles Musgrove , and her fine little boys , Anne was at liberty .
" Last night , in Drury Lane lobby , I ran against Sir John Middleton , and when he saw who I was -- for the first time these two months -- he spoke to me .-- That he had cut me ever since my marriage , I had seen without surprise or resentment .
Now they were as strangers ; nay , worse than strangers , for they could never become acquainted .
I was startled and shocked .
He was not only pardoned , they were delighted with him .
This is a connexion which offers nothing but good .
" Poor Mrs . Churchill !
" Your command ?-- Yes ."
You have been here only to be useful .
Emma assisted with her invention , memory and taste ; and as Harriet wrote a very pretty hand , it was likely to be an arrangement of the first order , in form as well as quantity .
At first , they were capable of nothing more to the purpose than such exclamations ; but , after a while , Captain Wentworth , exerting himself , said --
You are safe in all worldly matters , and safe in his character .
" Mrs . Bates , let me propose your venturing on one of these eggs .
They was stopping in a chaise at the door of the New London Inn , as I went there with a message from Sally at the Park to her brother , who is one of the post - boys .
In the intervals of the concert it was conversation ."
You must stay to be acquainted with Mrs Wallis , the beautiful Mrs Wallis .
A cold stormy rain set in , and nothing of July appeared but in the trees and shrubs , which the wind was despoiling , and the length of the day , which only made such cruel sights the longer visible .
ought he not to have told me of it , to have given me the power of clearing myself ?
said her brother to Colonel Brandon , in a low voice , as soon as he could secure his attention ,-- " She has not such good health as her sister ,-- she is very nervous ,-- she has not Elinor ' s constitution ;-- and one must allow that there is something very trying to a young woman who HAS BEEN a beauty in the loss of her personal attractions .
" I do pity you .
" Well , Emma , I do not believe I have any thing more to say about the boys ; but you have your sister ' s letter , and every thing is down at full length there we may be sure .
His face lengthened immediately ; and his voice was the voice of sentiment as he answered .
He was neither so unjust , nor so ungrateful , as to leave his estate from his nephew ;-- but he left it to him on such terms as destroyed half the value of the bequest .
Believe me , sir , I am far , very far , from gratified in being the object of such professions ."
Sir Walter was not very wise ; but still he had experience enough of the world to feel , that a more unobjectionable tenant , in all essentials , than Admiral Croft bid fair to be , could hardly offer .
Miss Fairfax knows it is not from the Campbells , or they would have been guessed at first .
I am sure Edward Ferrars is not well .
Mr . Woodhouse very soon followed them into the drawing - room .
He is just as superior as ever ;-- but being married , you know , it is quite a different thing .
Any thing else I should be most happy to do , at your command -- but my dancing days are over ."
Come to me , Walter , come to cousin Charles ."
Lucy looked at Elinor again , and was silent .
I did it because I thought it would offend you ; but , as you made no objection , I never did it again ."
Emma did not repent her condescension in going to the Coles .
With a great deal of quiet observation , and a knowledge , which she often wished less , of her father ' s character , she was sensible that results the most serious to his family from the intimacy were more than possible .
Her joy and expression of regard long outlived her wonder .
His professions and his proposals did him no service .
Mr . Weston , always alert when business was to be done , and as incapable of procrastinating any evil that was inevitable , as of foreseeing any that was doubtful , said , " It was time to go ;" and the young man , though he might and did sigh , could not but agree , to take leave .
In the course of the spring she must return their civilities by one very superior party -- in which her card - tables should be set out with their separate candles and unbroken packs in the true style -- and more waiters engaged for the evening than their own establishment could furnish , to carry round the refreshments at exactly the proper hour , and in the proper order .
If the strength of your reciprocal attachment had failed , as between many people , and under many circumstances it naturally would during a four years ' engagement , your situation would have been pitiable , indeed ."
No letter of condolence had been sent to Ireland .
It seemed the best scheme ; and yet it was not so good but that many of them wanted a better .
In London , perhaps , in your present quiet style of living , it might be as you say : but in Bath ; Sir Walter Elliot and his family will always be worth knowing : always acceptable as acquaintance ."
One of those points on which his influence failed , he then mentioned .
They were relieved however , not by her own recollection , but by the good will of Lucy , who believed herself to be inflicting a severe disappointment when she told her that Edward certainly would not be in Harley Street on Tuesday , and even hoped to be carrying the pain still farther by persuading her that he was kept away by the extreme affection for herself , which he could not conceal when they were together .
Alas !
Harriet looked white and frightened , and he was trying to cheer her .-- The iron gates and the front - door were not twenty yards asunder ;-- they were all three soon in the hall , and Harriet immediately sinking into a chair fainted away .
I never was at his house ; but they say it is a sweet pretty place ."
I would lay any wager it is about Miss Williams .
I will not abuse him .
You can have been acquainted with it only since I came to Bath , excepting as you might hear me previously spoken of in my own family ."
Every circumstance belonging to him was interesting .
I do look forward to it , I own , with _very_ great pleasure ."
From his wife ' s account of him she could discern Mr Smith to have been a man of warm feelings , easy temper , careless habits , and not strong understanding , much more amiable than his friend , and very unlike him , led by him , and probably despised by him .
But tomorrow I think I shall certainly be able to call in Berkeley Street , and be introduced to your friend Mrs . Jennings .
Mr . Palmer looked up on her entering the room , stared at her some minutes , and then returned to his newspaper .
" Oh !
I remember her telling me at the ball , that I owed Mrs . Elton gratitude for her attentions to Miss Fairfax .-- I hope this history of my conduct towards her will be admitted by you and my father as great extenuation of what you saw amiss .
Far be it from me to repine at his doing so ; he had an undoubted right to dispose of his own property as he chose , but , in consequence of it , we have been obliged to make large purchases of linen , china , & c . to supply the place of what was taken away .
All this spoken extremely fast obliged Miss Bates to stop for breath ; and Emma said something very civil about the excellence of Miss Fairfax ' s handwriting .
The window at which he stood was at the other end of the room from where the two ladies were sitting , and though nearer to Captain Wentworth ' s table , not very near .
" He certainly did .
He contrived that she should be seated by him ; and was sufficiently employed in looking out the best baked apple for her , and trying to make her help or advise him in his work , till Jane Fairfax was quite ready to sit down to the pianoforte again .
But take care of yourself .
They were so deserving , that a _little_ higher should have been enough : but as it was , how could she have done otherwise ?-- Impossible !-- She could not repent .
The extreme sweetness of her temper must hurt his .
He can be of essential service to me ; and if you would have the goodness , my dear Miss Elliot , to make it an object to yourself , of course it is done ."
The child ' s situation put the visit entirely aside ; but she could not hear of her escape with indifference , even in the midst of the serious anxiety which they afterwards felt on his account .
" But , my dear Marianne , as it has already exposed you to some very impertinent remarks , do you not now begin to doubt the discretion of your own conduct ?"
It was now about the time that she was likely to call .
Mark his professions to my poor husband .
I have read worse charades .
In this walk Emma and Mr . Weston found all the others assembled ; and towards this view she immediately perceived Mr . Knightley and Harriet distinct from the rest , quietly leading the way .
Anne could only feel that Charles Hayter was wise .
It is very fit they should have daughters ' shares ; and I am sure he has always been a very kind , liberal father to me .
My heart was in Highbury , and my business was to get my body thither as often as might be , and with the least suspicion .
Was not she the whole day with you ?"
" You MUST drink tea with us to night ," said he , " for we shall be quite alone -- and tomorrow you must absolutely dine with us , for we shall be a large party ."
" No , ma ' am .
But Sir John did not sport long with the curiosity which he delighted to raise , for he had at least as much pleasure in telling the name , as Miss Steele had in hearing it .
I fancy they are all at Uppercross ."
At this moment whom are you thinking of ?"
" You reside in Devonshire , I think ,"-- was his next observation , " in a cottage near Dawlish ."
Will not the old prejudice be too strong ?"
" Not at all .
" He DID feel the same , Elinor -- for weeks and weeks he felt it .
Hitherto she had carefully avoided every companion in her rambles .
If he means any thing , it must be to please you .
A man must be very much in love , indeed , to describe her so .
Mary always has her own way ."
It was impossible but that Mrs Clay must hate the sight of Mr Elliot ; and yet she could assume a most obliging , placid look , and appear quite satisfied with the curtailed license of devoting herself only half as much to Sir Walter as she would have done otherwise .
Somebody had placed her , several years back , at Mrs . Goddard ' s school , and somebody had lately raised her from the condition of scholar to that of parlour - boarder .
" He cannot bear writing , you know ," she continued -- " he says it is quite shocking ."
Anne felt an instant oppression , and wherever she looked saw symptoms of the same .
That , I thought , in a man of known musical talent , was some proof ."
In a worldly view , he had nothing to gain by being on terms with Sir Walter ; nothing to risk by a state of variance .
He came to them every day .
Nobody but yourself could imagine such a thing possible .
In he walked , the first and the handsomest ; and after paying his compliments en passant to Miss Bates and her niece , made his way directly to the opposite side of the circle , where sat Miss Woodhouse ; and till he could find a seat by her , would not sit at all .
" I have no hesitation in saying ," replied Mr . Elton , though hesitating a good deal while he spoke ; " I have no hesitation in saying -- at least if my friend feels at all as _I_ do -- I have not the smallest doubt that , could he see his little effusion honoured as _I_ see it , ( looking at the book again , and replacing it on the table ), he would consider it as the proudest moment of his life ."
All the minor arrangements of table and chair , lights and music , tea and supper , made themselves ; or were left as mere trifles to be settled at any time between Mrs . Weston and Mrs .
It is the very last thing I would stand the brunt of just now .
She wished he could love a ballroom better , and could like Frank Churchill better .-- He seemed often observing her .
Marianne ' s performance was highly applauded .
The interest with which she thus anticipated the party , was soon afterwards increased , more powerfully than pleasantly , by her hearing that the Miss Steeles were also to be at it .
She , however , was soon persuaded to think differently .
Every invitation was successful .
He had been there for four - and - twenty hours .
You could make it into two parcels , Mrs . Ford , could not you ?"
In marrying a man indifferent to me , all risk would have been incurred , and all duty violated ."
Emma was most happy to be called to such a council ; and her father , engaging to think it all over while she was gone , the two young people set off together without delay for the Crown .
Then here is my last ,"-- unclosing a pretty sketch of a gentleman in small size , whole - length --" my last and my best -- my brother , Mr . John Knightley .-- This did not want much of being finished , when I put it away in a pet , and vowed I would never take another likeness .
Ah !
I am sure you did not much expect to like us .
He survived his uncle no longer ; and ten thousand pounds , including the late legacies , was all that remained for his widow and daughters .
There was no injury but to the head .
But the Martins occupied her thoughts a good deal ; she had spent two very happy months with them , and now loved to talk of the pleasures of her visit , and describe the many comforts and wonders of the place .
Bates ?"
I see no advantage in consulting Miss Bates ."
This conviction , though not entirely satisfactory , gave her pleasure , and she continued her letter with greater alacrity .
You might not see one in a hundred with _gentleman_ so plainly written as in Mr . Knightley .
" The language , I know , is highly disrespectful .
cried Marianne in the wildest anxiety .
He had been used to think her unjust to Jane , and had now great pleasure in marking an improvement .
He was to leave them early the next day ; and he soon began with --
" Mr . Willoughby , you OUGHT to feel , and I certainly DO -- that after what has passed -- your coming here in this manner , and forcing yourself upon my notice , requires a very particular excuse .-- What is it , that you mean by it ?"
" The ladies were all at home ."
He had a wife .
" Mrs . Weston ' s manners ," said Emma , " were always particularly good .
Benevolent , philanthropic man !
The clouds seem parting too , the sun will be out in a moment , and we shall have a clear afternoon ."
" My dear Emma , as long as he thinks so , it is so ; but if he really loves Jane Fairfax --"
I cannot be so sanguine as Mr . Weston .
The high downs which invited them from almost every window of the cottage to seek the exquisite enjoyment of air on their summits , were a happy alternative when the dirt of the valleys beneath shut up their superior beauties ; and towards one of these hills did Marianne and Margaret one memorable morning direct their steps , attracted by the partial sunshine of a showery sky , and unable longer to bear the confinement which the settled rain of the two preceding days had occasioned .
Elinor could not suppose that Sir John would be more nice in proclaiming his suspicions of her regard for Edward , than he had been with respect to Marianne ; indeed it was rather his favourite joke of the two , as being somewhat newer and more conjectural ; and since Edward ' s visit , they had never dined together without his drinking to her best affections with so much significancy and so many nods and winks , as to excite general attention .
Something occurred , however , to give her a different duty .
They were soon dining in company together at Mr Musgrove ' s , for the little boy ' s state could no longer supply his aunt with a pretence for absenting herself ; and this was but the beginning of other dinings and other meetings .
This living of Colonel Brandon ' s -- can it be true ?-- has he really given it to Edward ?-- I heard it yesterday by chance , and was coming to you on purpose to enquire farther about it ."
Miss Woodhouse , do you think we shall ever find it out ?"
" I have a notion ," said Lucy , " you think the little Middletons rather too much indulged ; perhaps they may be the outside of enough ; but it is so natural in Lady Middleton ; and for my part , I love to see children full of life and spirits ; I cannot bear them if they are tame and quiet ."
" Who is that gentleman on horseback ?"
But she was always right .
My cousin Anne shakes her head .
" It would not be a great match for Henrietta , but Charles has a very fair chance , through the Spicers , of getting something from the Bishop in the course of a year or two ; and you will please to remember , that he is the eldest son ; whenever my uncle dies , he steps into very pretty property .
" No ; my feelings are not often shared , not often understood .
She began not to understand a word they said , and was obliged to plead indisposition and excuse herself .
He and I have been at times thrown a good deal together , while you have been wholly engrossed on the most affectionate principle by my mother .
Living constantly with right - minded and well - informed people , her heart and understanding had received every advantage of discipline and culture ; and Colonel Campbell ' s residence being in London , every lighter talent had been done full justice to , by the attendance of first - rate masters .
" Oh !
It is his companion all this evening , his solace , his delight .
She could not endure the idea of treachery or levity , or anything akin to ill usage between him and his friend .
such an aunt !"
" You think her diffident .
" How then ," asked her sister , " would you account for his behaviour ?"
" You would not have gone , however ," said Elinor , recovering herself , and determined to get over what she so much dreaded as soon as possible , " without receiving our good wishes , even if we had not been able to give them in person .
I have no wish to be distinguished ; and have every reason to hope I never shall .
Then , perhaps , you cannot tell me what sort of a woman she is ?"
" I mentioned no _names_ , you will observe .-- Oh !
But surely you may put off this old lady till to - morrow : she is not so near her end , I presume , but that she may hope to see another day .
This picture , she had allowed herself to believe , might have been accidentally obtained ; it might not have been Edward ' s gift ; but a correspondence between them by letter , could subsist only under a positive engagement , could be authorised by nothing else ; for a few moments , she was almost overcome -- her heart sunk within her , and she could hardly stand ; but exertion was indispensably necessary ; and she struggled so resolutely against the oppression of her feelings , that her success was speedy , and for the time complete .
" Four months !"
" Oh !
Harriet ' s sweet easy temper will not mind it ."
Real , long - standing regard brought the Westons and Mr . Knightley ; and by Mr . Elton , a young man living alone without liking it , the privilege of exchanging any vacant evening of his own blank solitude for the elegancies and society of Mr . Woodhouse ' s drawing - room , and the smiles of his lovely daughter , was in no danger of being thrown away .
Mr . Weston ' s own happiness was indisputable .
said Mr . Woodhouse , shaking his head and fixing his eyes on her with tender concern .-- The ejaculation in Emma ' s ear expressed , " Ah !
" Oh !
He was now esteemed quite worthy to address the daughter of a foolish , spendthrift baronet , who had not had principle or sense enough to maintain himself in the situation in which Providence had placed him , and who could give his daughter at present but a small part of the share of ten thousand pounds which must be hers hereafter .
The two families were so continually meeting , so much in the habit of running in and out of each other ' s house at all hours , that it was rather a surprise to her to find Mary alone ; but being alone , her being unwell and out of spirits was almost a matter of course .
" No ," replied Lucy , " not to Mr . ROBERT Ferrars -- I never saw him in my life ; but ," fixing her eyes upon Elinor , " to his eldest brother ."
Colonel Brandon again repeated his sorrow at being the cause of disappointing the party ; but at the same time declared it to be unavoidable .
Charlotte laughed heartily to think that her husband could not get rid of her ; and exultingly said , she did not care how cross he was to her , as they must live together .
She had this communication , moreover , from Mary .
He should like to see the old house again exceedingly , and should be very happy to meet Mr . and Mrs . Elton , and any other of his neighbours .-- He could not see any objection at all to his , and Emma ' s , and Harriet ' s going there some very fine morning .
Abundance of civilities passed on all sides .
He is not a young man with whom one can be intimately acquainted in a short time , but I have seen enough of him to wish him well for his own sake , and as a friend of yours , I wish it still more .
He lived to exert , and frequently to enjoy himself .
The party before her were , Mrs Musgrove , talking to Mrs Croft , and Captain Harville to Captain Wentworth ; and she immediately heard that Mary and Henrietta , too impatient to wait , had gone out the moment it had cleared , but would be back again soon , and that the strictest injunctions had been left with Mrs Musgrove to keep her there till they returned .
" Thank you , dear Miss Woodhouse .
" She is dead !
Miss Bates had just done as Patty opened the door ; and her visitors walked upstairs without having any regular narration to attend to , pursued only by the sounds of her desultory good - will .
I know those who would be shocked by such a representation of Mr Elliot , who would have difficulty in believing it ; but I have never been satisfied .
But I will try to command myself .
A man at his age -- what is he ?-- three or four - and - twenty -- cannot be without the means of doing as much as that .
This to _me_ !
" Yes , yes , we can guess where he is ; at his own house at Norland to be sure .
" No ," replied Anne , in a low , feeling voice .
The gentlemen had their own pursuits , the ladies proceeded on their own business , and they met no more while Anne belonged to them .
He did not know what was come to his master lately , he said , but he could hardly ever get the speech of him .
I had no right to expect much , and I did not expect much ; but I had no idea that he could be so very clownish , so totally without air .
I only wanted to prove to you that Mrs . S . admits our apology , and is not offended .
I wonder what will become of her !"
Upon my word , Jane on one arm , and me on the other !-- Stop , stop , let us stand a little back , Mrs . Elton is going ; dear Mrs . Elton , how elegant she looks !-- Beautiful lace !-- Now we all follow in her train .
" By all means ," said she ; " only tell me all about it , when you do come .
" John does not even mention your friend ," said Mr . Knightley .
Elinor avoided it upon principle , as tending to fix still more upon her thoughts , by the too warm , too positive assurances of Marianne , that belief of Edward ' s continued affection for herself which she rather wished to do away ; and Marianne ' s courage soon failed her , in trying to converse upon a topic which always left her more dissatisfied with herself than ever , by the comparison it necessarily produced between Elinor ' s conduct and her own .
We cannot mean the same Mr .
Mr Elliot was not disappointed in the interest he hoped to raise .
The first three or four days passed most quietly , with no circumstance to mark them excepting the receipt of a note or two from Lyme , which found their way to Anne , she could not tell how , and brought a rather improving account of Louisa .
" I understand you ," he replied , with an expressive smile , and a voice perfectly calm ; " yes , I am very drunk .-- A pint of porter with my cold beef at Marlborough was enough to over - set me ."
" I do not see how it can be done ," said she , " without affronting Lady Middleton , for they spend every day with her ; otherwise I should be exceedingly glad to do it .
The part which provoked her most , was that in all this waste of foresight and caution , she should have lost the right moment for seeing whether he saw them .
She knew herself to be of the first utility to the child ; and what was it to her if Frederick Wentworth were only half a mile distant , making himself agreeable to others ?
" And a very well - spoken , genteel , shrewd lady , she seemed to be ," continued he ; " asked more questions about the house , and terms , and taxes , than the Admiral himself , and seemed more conversant with business ; and moreover , Sir Walter , I found she was not quite unconnected in this country , any more than her husband ; that is to say , she is sister to a gentleman who did live amongst us once ; she told me so herself : sister to the gentleman who lived a few years back at Monkford .
" And when ," thought Emma , " will there be a beginning of Mr .
" I dare say ," replied Mrs . Weston , smiling , " that I thought so _then_ ;-- but since we have parted , I can never remember Emma ' s omitting to do any thing I wished ."
I assure you I have .
" If you could be assured of that , you think you should be easy ."
He could not say that he was sorry on his own account ; his very cheerful look would have contradicted him if he had ; but he said , and very steadily , that he was sorry for the disappointment of the others , and with considerable kindness added ,
" Oh !
Emma was gratified , and would soon have shewn no want of words , if the sound of Mrs . Elton ' s voice from the sitting - room had not checked her , and made it expedient to compress all her friendly and all her congratulatory sensations into a very , very earnest shake of the hand .
What a softener of the heart was this persuasion !
He called for a few moments , just to leave a piece of paper on the table containing , as he said , a charade , which a friend of his had addressed to a young lady , the object of his admiration , but which , from his manner , Emma was immediately convinced must be his own .
I give you notice -- You will find me a formidable antagonist on that point .
CHAPTER 41
Yes , I see what she means , ( turning to Mr . Knightley ,) and I will try to hold my tongue .
Sir Walter only nodded .
" I will carry her myself .
" Yes -- entirely her own doing , entirely her own choice ; and Colonel and Mrs . Campbell think she does quite right , just what they should recommend ; and indeed they particularly _wish_ her to try her native air , as she has not been quite so well as usual lately ."
Oh !
It then occurred to her to employ him in reading .
Mary had acquired a little artificial importance , by becoming Mrs Charles Musgrove ; but Anne , with an elegance of mind and sweetness of character , which must have placed her high with any people of real understanding , was nobody with either father or sister ; her word had no weight , her convenience was always to give way -- she was only Anne .
" Do you know what kind of a girl Miss Grey is ?
That ' s what he did , and nobody else could have saved poor James .
She was immediately up , and wanting to quit the table ; but so many were also moving , that she could not get away ; and Mr . Knightley thought he saw another collection of letters anxiously pushed towards her , and resolutely swept away by her unexamined .
" To be sure it would ."
" Yes ; he has very good property in Dorsetshire ."
The Musgroves could hardly be more ready to invite than he to come , particularly in the morning , when he had no companion at home , for the Admiral and Mrs Croft were generally out of doors together , interesting themselves in their new possessions , their grass , and their sheep , and dawdling about in a way not endurable to a third person , or driving out in a gig , lately added to their establishment .
The Dashwoods were now settled at Barton with tolerable comfort to themselves .
It would have been very unpleasant to me in every respect .
If the change be not from outward circumstances , it must be from within ; it must be nature , man ' s nature , which has done the business for Captain Benwick ."
" How do you like Mrs .
Mr . Elton is going to be married ."
It will be giving him so much pleasure !
" Very true , very true .
They were only asked , she was sure , because Lady Dalrymple being kept at home by a bad cold , was glad to make use of the relationship which had been so pressed on her ; and she declined on her own account with great alacrity --" She was engaged to spend the evening with an old schoolfellow ."
Chapter 16
there is one difficulty unprovided for ," cried Emma .
How very differently we feel !-- Not think they will do each other any good !
The rest of the day , the following night , were hardly enough for her thoughts .-- She was bewildered amidst the confusion of all that had rushed on her within the last few hours .
" No , I thank you .
I do not care for myself .
A few minutes more of silent exertion enabled him to proceed with composure .
" You do not appear so well satisfied with his letter as I am ; but still you must , at least I hope you must , think the better of him for it .
" I begged him to exert himself for fear you should suspect what was the matter ; but it made him so melancholy , not being able to stay more than a fortnight with us , and seeing me so much affected .-- Poor fellow !-- I am afraid it is just the same with him now ; for he writes in wretched spirits .
Chapter 12
" The Ibbotsons , were they there ?
Will you not shake hands with me ?"
Elinor ' s curiosity to see Mrs . Ferrars was satisfied .-- She had found in her every thing that could tend to make a farther connection between the families undesirable .-- She had seen enough of her pride , her meanness , and her determined prejudice against herself , to comprehend all the difficulties that must have perplexed the engagement , and retarded the marriage , of Edward and herself , had he been otherwise free ;-- and she had seen almost enough to be thankful for her OWN sake , that one greater obstacle preserved her from suffering under any other of Mrs . Ferrars ' s creation , preserved her from all dependence upon her caprice , or any solicitude for her good opinion .
But hush , hush !"
And now I can tolerably comprehend his behaviour .
I am glad to find , however , from what you say , that he is a respectable young man , and one whose acquaintance will not be ineligible ."
Harriet would be loved as one to whom she could be useful .
cried Mr .
When first sounded on the subject , he was so miserable , that they were almost hopeless .-- A second allusion , indeed , gave less pain .-- He began to think it was to be , and that he could not prevent it -- a very promising step of the mind on its way to resignation .
Do not mimic her .
I am glad I did not think of it before .
" He had been introduced to Sir Walter and your sister before I was acquainted with him , but I heard him speak of them for ever .
" It might be distressing , for the moment ," said she ; " but you seem to have behaved extremely well ; and it is over -- and may never -- can never , as a first meeting , occur again , and therefore you need not think about it ."
It was a contrast which recommended him most forcibly to her mother .
As this silence continued , every day made it appear more strange and more incompatible with the disposition of both .
a man does not imagine any such thing .
" Whenever the time may come , it must be unwelcome to her and all her friends -- but I hope her engagement will have every alleviation that is possible -- I mean , as to the character and manners of the family ."
Frank Churchill ' s confession of having behaved shamefully was the first thing to call for more than a word in passing .
Emma , this is your doing .
Mrs . Jennings immediately whispered to Elinor ,
It would be incompatible with what she owed to her father , and with what she felt for him .
" Here is his answer , if you like to see it ."
And with regard to Anne ' s dislike of Bath , she considered it as a prejudice and mistake arising , first , from the circumstance of her having been three years at school there , after her mother ' s death ; and secondly , from her happening to be not in perfectly good spirits the only winter which she had afterwards spent there with herself .
But first of all , there must be an answer written to Mrs .
Her daughter , feeling by turns both pleased and pained , surprised and not surprised , was all silent attention .
Certain it was that she was to come ; and that Highbury , instead of welcoming that perfect novelty which had been so long promised it -- Mr . Frank Churchill -- must put up for the present with Jane Fairfax , who could bring only the freshness of a two years ' absence .
The studied indifference , insolence , and discontent of her husband gave her no pain ; and when he scolded or abused her , she was highly diverted .
She could not be complying , she dreaded being quarrelsome ; her heroism reached only to silence .
As Mr Elliot became known to her , she grew more charitable , or more indifferent , towards the others .
" It is a matter of great joy to me ; and I feel the goodness of Colonel Brandon most sensibly .
Anne had been too little from home , too little seen .
I can understand you --( nodding at Mr . John Knightley )-- your good fortune in meeting with so many of your friends at once here , delights you too much to pass unnoticed .
that ' s a great pity ; for I assure you , Miss Woodhouse , where the waters do agree , it is quite wonderful the relief they give .
CHAPTER 20
In the drawing - room , whither she then repaired , she was soon joined by Mrs . Jennings , with a wine - glass , full of something , in her hand .
" It is one that I shall never change , however ."
That will be very bad ."
One could not be connected with better people .
Even Sophy could not understand it .
Lucy , with a demure and settled air , seemed determined to make no contribution to the comfort of the others , and would not say a word ; and almost every thing that WAS said , proceeded from Elinor , who was obliged to volunteer all the information about her mother ' s health , their coming to town , & c . which Edward ought to have inquired about , but never did .
I dare say they often think of you , and wonder which will be the day , the precise day of the instrument ' s coming to hand .
said he ; so I just mentioned .
But " ( with a little return of anxiety ) " it cannot be expected to last long .
You are the worst judge in the world , Mr . Knightley , of the difficulties of dependence .
" That is the case with us all , papa .
It confesses that you have long understood me ."
When does she try to avoid society , or appear restless and dissatisfied in it ?"
Mama saw him here once before ;-- but I was with my uncle at Weymouth .
" She will be all delight and gratitude , but she will tell you nothing .
Dear , Miss Woodhouse , I was absolutely miserable !
Your business cannot be with ME .
It does relate to him , and I will tell you directly ;" ( resuming her work , and seeming resolved against looking up .)
Frank Churchill ' s character was not desperate .-- She was his own Emma , by hand and word , when they returned into the house ; and if he could have thought of Frank Churchill then , he might have deemed him a very good sort of fellow .
he exclaimed --" Improve this dear cottage !
" Yes ," said Harriet earnestly , " and well she might , nobody could ever have a better .
" Offended me !
After attending Louisa through her business , and loitering about a little longer , they returned to the inn ; and Anne , in passing afterwards quickly from her own chamber to their dining - room , had nearly run against the very same gentleman , as he came out of an adjoining apartment .
She was quick in feeling the little injuries to Isabella , which Isabella never felt herself .
Her husband was a grave looking young man of five or six and twenty , with an air of more fashion and sense than his wife , but of less willingness to please or be pleased .
" I am not wishing him too much good ," said Marianne at last with a sigh , " when I wish his secret reflections may be no more unpleasant than my own .
It was folly to be disturbed by it .
How could such a thought occur to you ?
Her pleasure in seeing him was like every other of her feelings , strong in itself , and strongly spoken .
She will tell you any thing if you ask .
In such a case , a plain and open avowal of his difficulties would have been more to his honour I think , as well as more consistent with his general character ;-- but I will not raise objections against any one ' s conduct on so illiberal a foundation , as a difference in judgment from myself , or a deviation from what I may think right and consistent ."
Something of that nature would be particularly desirable for _me_ , as an inducement to keep me in practice ; for married women , you know -- there is a sad story against them , in general .
" I have lately imagined that I saw symptoms of attachment between them -- certain expressive looks , which I did not believe meant to be public ."
" Indeed I am perfectly convinced of your regard for me , and next to Edward ' s love , it is the greatest comfort I have .-- Poor Edward !-- But now there is one good thing , we shall be able to meet , and meet pretty often , for Lady Middleton ' s delighted with Mrs . Dashwood , so we shall be a good deal in Harley Street , I dare say , and Edward spends half his time with his sister -- besides , Lady Middleton and Mrs . Ferrars will visit now ;-- and Mrs . Ferrars and your sister were both so good to say more than once , they should always be glad to see me .-- They are such charming women !-- I am sure if ever you tell your sister what I think of her , you cannot speak too high ."
" So my daughter Middleton told me , for it seems Sir John met him somewhere in the street this morning ."
Mr . Frank Churchill was one of the boasts of Highbury , and a lively curiosity to see him prevailed , though the compliment was so little returned that he had never been there in his life .
You would not come in and sit with us in this comfortable way , if you were married ."
She depended on the evil feelings of the Eltons for supplying all the discipline of pointed neglect that could be farther requisite .-- Harriet rational , Frank Churchill not too much in love , and Mr . Knightley not wanting to quarrel with her , how very happy a summer must be before her !
She therefore satisfied herself with common - place remarks or quiet attention , and the Admiral had it all his own way .
" It was my friend Mrs Rooke ; Nurse Rooke ; who , by - the - bye , had a great curiosity to see you , and was delighted to be in the way to let you in .
All was safe and prosperous ; and as the removal of one solicitude generally makes way for another , Emma , being now certain of her ball , began to adopt as the next vexation Mr . Knightley ' s provoking indifference about it .
" Upon my word ," exclaimed Emma , " you amuse me !
All that remained to be done was to be speedy ; and , therefore staying only till she could leave Mrs . Jennings ' s maid with her sister , she hurried down stairs .
" Yes ," replied Harriet modestly , but not fearfully --" I must say that I have ."
--
Perhaps he has not observed you yet ."
He , her father , a well - meaning , but not a quick - sighted man , could really , I believe , give no information ; for he had been generally confined to the house , while the girls were ranging over the town and making what acquaintance they chose ; and he tried to convince me , as thoroughly as he was convinced himself , of his daughter ' s being entirely unconcerned in the business .
Yes , Marianne , even in a man between thirty and forty .
" Oh !
Mrs . Palmer and two elderly ladies of Mrs . Jennings ' s intimate acquaintance , whom she had met and invited in the morning , dined with them .
" But what are his manners on more intimate acquaintance ?
" Now he must begin all over again with somebody else .
" I am extremely glad , indeed ," cried Anne , " particularly glad that this should happen ; and that of two sisters , who both deserve equally well , and who have always been such good friends , the pleasant prospect of one should not be dimming those of the other -- that they should be so equal in their prosperity and comfort .
Ferrars ."
From Frank Churchill ' s face , where he thought he saw confusion suppressed or laughed away , he had involuntarily turned to hers ; but she was indeed behind , and too busy with her shawl .
I shall just go round by Mrs . Cole ' s ; but I shall not stop three minutes : and , Jane , you had better go home directly -- I would not have you out in a shower !-- We think she is the better for Highbury already .
She would not be in a hurry to find fault , but she suspected that there was no elegance ;-- ease , but not elegance .-- She was almost sure that for a young woman , a stranger , a bride , there was too much ease .
The closing of the little gate , at the entrance of the green court in front of the house , drew her eyes to the window , and she saw a large party walking up to the door .
He sat down with them , and improved their conversation very much .
I tried -- but could not frame a sentence .
" None at all , ma ' am , I thank you ."
I hope we shall have her here next week .
You know I am always ready to pay them any attention in my power , as my taking them out this evening shews .
So I got Sophy to lend me a hand , and we soon shifted their quarters ; and now I am quite snug , with my little shaving glass in one corner , and another great thing that I never go near ."
He did speak yesterday -- that is , he wrote , and was refused ."
" What is the matter with Brandon ?"
She was delighted with the fortitude of her little friend -- for fortitude she knew it was in her to give up being in company and stay at home ; and she could now invite the very person whom she really wanted to make the eighth , Jane Fairfax .-- Since her last conversation with Mrs . Weston and Mr . Knightley , she was more conscience - stricken about Jane Fairfax than she had often been .-- Mr .
" I have very little to say for my own conduct .-- I was tempted by his attentions , and allowed myself to appear pleased .-- An old story , probably -- a common case -- and no more than has happened to hundreds of my sex before ; and yet it may not be the more excusable in one who sets up as I do for Understanding .
" You seem determined to think ill of him ."
When this was over , Mr . Woodhouse gratefully observed , " It is very kind of you , Mr . Knightley , to come out at this late hour to call upon us .
If I come , I shall be cross ."
The greatest kindness you can shew me , will be to let me have my own way , and only say that I am gone when it is necessary ."
" Upon my word !
" These are the sights , Harriet , to do one good .
His affection was all her own .
She was , moreover , perpetually hearing about him ; for , excepting when at Hartfield , she was always among those who saw no fault in Mr . Elton , and found nothing so interesting as the discussion of his concerns ; and every report , therefore , every guess -- all that had already occurred , all that might occur in the arrangement of his affairs , comprehending income , servants , and furniture , was continually in agitation around her .
Not a soul of all my relations know of it but Anne , and I never should have mentioned it to you , if I had not felt the greatest dependence in the world upon your secrecy ; and I really thought my behaviour in asking so many questions about Mrs . Ferrars must seem so odd , that it ought to be explained .
" My dearest Emma ," said he , " for dearest you will always be , whatever the event of this hour ' s conversation , my dearest , most beloved Emma -- tell me at once .
Elinor was not inclined , after a little observation , to give him credit for being so genuinely and unaffectedly ill - natured or ill - bred as he wished to appear .
He wanted to marry well , and having the arrogance to raise his eyes to her , pretended to be in love ; but she was perfectly easy as to his not suffering any disappointment that need be cared for .
Many were the tears shed by them in their last adieus to a place so much beloved .
Oh , said I , my dear , I did say as much as I could .
However , the very same evening William Larkins came over with a large basket of apples , the same sort of apples , a bushel at least , and I was very much obliged , and went down and spoke to William Larkins and said every thing , as you may suppose .
Here Anne spoke --
" There does , indeed , seem as little to tempt her to break her resolution at present ," said Mrs . Weston , " as can well be ; and while she is so happy at Hartfield , I cannot wish her to be forming any attachment which would be creating such difficulties on poor Mr . Woodhouse ' s account .
" But how is your fame to be established ?
Such varieties of human nature as they are in the habit of witnessing !
" No , ma ' am .
Mrs . Taylor told me of it half an hour ago , and she was told it by a particular friend of Miss Grey herself , else I am sure I should not have believed it ; and I was almost ready to sink as it was .
Perhaps it is paid already .
" I may venture to say that HIS observations have stretched much further than your candour .
Elinor bowed her assent .
Don ' t pretend to be in raptures about mine .
" But will there be good room for five couple ?-- I really do not think there will ."
Is it necessary for me to use any roundabout phrase ?-- Your Yorkshire friend -- your correspondent in Yorkshire ;-- that would be the way , I suppose , if I were very bad .-- No , I can pronounce his name without the smallest distress .
After waiting a few moments he said , and as if it were the result of immediate feeling , " It is a period , indeed !
He had many years ago received such a description of Miss Anne Elliot as had inspired him with the highest idea of her merit , and excited the warmest curiosity to know her ."
Mr . Knightley might quarrel with her , but Emma could not quarrel with herself .
He was not an ill - disposed young man , unless to be rather cold hearted and rather selfish is to be ill - disposed : but he was , in general , well respected ; for he conducted himself with propriety in the discharge of his ordinary duties .
But then , it had been taken up by his father and mother .
I should be as ready to acknowledge his merits as any other man ; but I hear of none , except what are merely personal ; that he is well - grown and good - looking , with smooth , plausible manners ."
" It is very pretty ," said Mr . Woodhouse .
no -- none in the least .
Yes , good man !-- thought Emma -- but what has all that to do with taking likenesses ?
Elinor only laughed .
She was remarkably quick in the discovery of attachments , and had enjoyed the advantage of raising the blushes and the vanity of many a young lady by insinuations of her power over such a young man ; and this kind of discernment enabled her soon after her arrival at Barton decisively to pronounce that Colonel Brandon was very much in love with Marianne Dashwood .
He had all the clearness and quickness of mind which she wanted , and he could sometimes act an ungracious , or say a severe thing .
In the very same inn with us !
Anne fully submitted , in silent , deep mortification .
Here I am , you see , staring at a picture .
A bride , you know , must appear like a bride , but my natural taste is all for simplicity ; a simple style of dress is so infinitely preferable to finery .
We shall live within a few miles of each other , and shall meet every day of our lives .
The card was pointedly given , and Sir Walter and Elizabeth arose and disappeared .
And if poor little Anna Weston is to be spoiled , it will be the greatest humanity in you to do as much for her as you have done for me , except falling in love with her when she is thirteen ."
There is my sister ; and really quite her own little elegant figure !-- and the face not unlike .
Charles , I declare it will be too abominable if you do , when you promised to go ."
From all danger of seeing Willoughby again , her mother considered her to be at least equally safe in town as in the country , since his acquaintance must now be dropped by all who called themselves her friends .
Elinor ' s office was a painful one .-- She was going to remove what she really believed to be her sister ' s chief consolation ,-- to give such particulars of Edward as she feared would ruin him for ever in her good opinion ,- and to make Marianne , by a resemblance in their situations , which to HER fancy would seem strong , feel all her own disappointment over again .
She recovered her voice .
Marianne had already sent to say , that she should eat nothing more .
She seemed bent on giving no real insight into Mr . Dixon ' s character , or her own value for his company , or opinion of the suitableness of the match .
Mrs . Weston had set off to pay the visit in a good deal of agitation herself ; and in the first place had wished not to go at all at present , to be allowed merely to write to Miss Fairfax instead , and to defer this ceremonious call till a little time had passed , and Mr . Churchill could be reconciled to the engagement ' s becoming known ; as , considering every thing , she thought such a visit could not be paid without leading to reports :-- but Mr . Weston had thought differently ; he was extremely anxious to shew his approbation to Miss Fairfax and her family , and did not conceive that any suspicion could be excited by it ; or if it were , that it would be of any consequence ; for " such things ," he observed , " always got about ."
" I think there will be very tolerable room for ten couple ."
" Very true , very true , indeed .
" Indeed you injure me if you suppose me unconvinced .
I was convinced there were two , and there is but one .
I am sure she is very good -- I hope she will be very happy .
I say , Jane , what a perfect character you and I should make , if we could be shaken together .
She knows their ways best ; but I should not consider their silence as any reason for their not meaning to make the present .
As for Colonel Brandon , she was not only ready to worship him as a saint , but was moreover truly anxious that he should be treated as one in all worldly concerns ; anxious that his tithes should be raised to the utmost ; and scarcely resolved to avail herself , at Delaford , as far as she possibly could , of his servants , his carriage , his cows , and his poultry .
She then took a longer time for consideration .
Either because he did not dance himself , or because the plan had been formed without his being consulted , he seemed resolved that it should not interest him , determined against its exciting any present curiosity , or affording him any future amusement .
I can imagine your objection to Harriet Smith .
" Did not you think him sadly out of spirits ?"
" Come , come ; this is all an effusion of immediate want of spirits , Edward .
And even Sir John ' s joking intelligence must have had some weight .
" Quit Kellynch Hall ."
Let her name her own supper , and go to bed .
One ' s fortune , as your mother justly says , is NOT one ' s own .
I never was equal to this ."
I say , sir ," turning to Mr . Woodhouse , " I think there are few places with such society as Highbury .
` Old fellow !'
But it shows you the man .
He began to suspect him of some double dealing in his pursuit of Emma .
His son , too well bred to hear the hint , rose immediately also , saying ,
Frank was standing by her , but not steadily ; there was a restlessness , which shewed a mind not at ease .
When he was here before , we made the best of it ; but there was a good deal of wet , damp , cheerless weather ; there always is in February , you know , and we could not do half that we intended .
With the exception , perhaps , of Admiral and Mrs Croft , who seemed particularly attached and happy , ( Anne could allow no other exceptions even among the married couples ), there could have been no two hearts so open , no tastes so similar , no feelings so in unison , no countenances so beloved .
Mr Elliot married then completely for money ?
" Where does he come from ?
I could not trace her beyond her first seducer , and there was every reason to fear that she had removed from him only to sink deeper in a life of sin .
They each felt his sorrows , and their own obligations , and Marianne , by general consent , was to be the reward of all .
Mr . John Knightley smiled , and replied ,
" My poor dear Harriet !
The present was that Captain Wentworth would move about well in her drawing - room .
Elinor has not my feelings , and therefore she may overlook it , and be happy with him .
" Oh !"
One cannot creep upon a journey ; one cannot help getting on faster than one has planned ; and the pleasure of coming in upon one ' s friends before the look - out begins , is worth a great deal more than any little exertion it needs ."
Emma knew this was too true for contradiction , and therefore said nothing .
It seemed as if Mr Shepherd , in this anxiety to bespeak Sir Walter ' s good will towards a naval officer as tenant , had been gifted with foresight ; for the very first application for the house was from an Admiral Croft , with whom he shortly afterwards fell into company in attending the quarter sessions at Taunton ; and indeed , he had received a hint of the Admiral from a London correspondent .
Such as it is , however , my pleasure in presenting him to it , will be very great .
The next morning brought another short note from Marianne -- still affectionate , open , artless , confiding -- everything that could make MY conduct most hateful .
" Miss Smith !-- message to Miss Smith !-- What could she possibly mean !"
But why be acquainted with us now ?"
The woman was better off ; she might have the assistance of fine clothes , and the privilege of bashfulness , but the man had only his own good sense to depend on ; and when she considered how peculiarly unlucky poor Mr . Elton was in being in the same room at once with the woman he had just married , the woman he had wanted to marry , and the woman whom he had been expected to marry , she must allow him to have the right to look as little wise , and to be as much affectedly , and as little really easy as could be .
For my part , I think the less that is said about such things , the better , the sooner ' tis blown over and forgot .
My uncle has been too good for me to encroach .-- I must still add to this long letter .
Miss Woodhouse must excuse me .
The great Mrs . Churchill was no more .
my father ' s next heir ?
" Yes , so I imagined .
" I have a notion ," said Sir John , " that Miss Marianne would not object to such a scheme , if her elder sister would come into it .
I shall have no fortune , and I fancy she is an exceeding proud woman ."
Dinner was on table .-- Mrs .
" I wish with all my soul ," cried Sir John , " that Willoughby were among us again ."
--
" I knew you by report long before you came to Bath .
very delightful indeed ; I can say nothing less , for I suppose Miss Woodhouse and Mr . Frank Churchill are hearing every thing that passes .
It is not likely you should ever have observed him ; but he knows you very well indeed -- I mean by sight ."
" Yes -- what should hurt me ?-- I walk fast .
If he were a little spoilt by such universal , such eager admiration , who could wonder ?
Here are seven of you , besides myself , ( who , she is pleased to say , am very entertaining already ,) and she only demands from each of you either one thing very clever , be it prose or verse , original or repeated -- or two things moderately clever -- or three things very dull indeed , and she engages to laugh heartily at them all ."
' Lord !'
when shall I leave you again ?"
" Upon my word , I never saw a young woman so desperately in love in my life !
She rejoiced in his being cleared from some part of his imputed guilt ;-- she was sorry for him ;-- she wished him happy .
She could undertake therefore to inform him of it , in the course of the day .
It is such a blessing !
I do not ask you to go with me , for I dare say your mind is too full of the matter to care for company ; and besides , you must long to tell your sister all about it ."
But there was no doing any thing , with Mr . Elton fidgeting behind her and watching every touch .
A week had not passed since Miss Hawkins ' s name was first mentioned in Highbury , before she was , by some means or other , discovered to have every recommendation of person and mind ; to be handsome , elegant , highly accomplished , and perfectly amiable : and when Mr . Elton himself arrived to triumph in his happy prospects , and circulate the fame of her merits , there was very little more for him to do , than to tell her Christian name , and say whose music she principally played .
A little further perseverance in patience and forced cheerfulness on Anne ' s side produced nearly a cure on Mary ' s .
You like Mr . Elton , papa ,-- I must look about for a wife for him .
( with some elevation ) I was thinking of a much more precious circumstance -- of Mr . Knightley ' s coming and asking me to dance , when Mr . Elton would not stand up with me ; and when there was no other partner in the room .
the good Bateses -- I am quite ashamed of myself -- but you mention them in most of your letters .
Her own emotions still kept her fixed .
So far from hence !
I will send you some more , before they get good for nothing .'
I think him every thing that is worthy and amiable ."
The same books , the same passages were idolized by each -- or if any difference appeared , any objection arose , it lasted no longer than till the force of her arguments and the brightness of her eyes could be displayed .
" Mrs Clay ," said she , warmly , " never forgets who she is ; and as I am rather better acquainted with her sentiments than you can be , I can assure you , that upon the subject of marriage they are particularly nice , and that she reprobates all inequality of condition and rank more strongly than most people .
" We hope she is ."
He loves any thing of the sort , and especially any thing that pays woman a compliment .
Their minds most dissimilar !
Such a good - natured fellow !
But at present there was nothing more to be said .
" You decide on his imperfections so much in the mass ," replied Elinor , " and so much on the strength of your own imagination , that the commendation I am able to give of him is comparatively cold and insipid .
Ten couple , in either of the Randalls rooms , would have been insufferable !-- Dreadful !-- I felt how right you were the whole time , but was too anxious for securing _any_ _thing_ to like to yield .
This was the letter , directed to " Charles Smith , Esq .
Elinor did not offer to detain him ; and they parted , with a very earnest assurance on HER side of her unceasing good wishes for his happiness in every change of situation that might befall him ; on HIS , with rather an attempt to return the same good will , than the power of expressing it .
I beg your pardon , Mr . Dashwood , but if he had done otherwise , I should have thought him a rascal .
They _shall_ talk .
I was a kinder friend than you deserved .
But Marianne for some time would give credit to neither .
It was a valued , a precious trust to me ; and gladly would I have discharged it in the strictest sense , by watching over her education myself , had the nature of our situations allowed it ; but I had no family , no home ; and my little Eliza was therefore placed at school .
no , I could not endure William Coxe -- a pert young lawyer ."
As soon as they entered the house , Marianne with a kiss of gratitude and these two words just articulate through her tears , " Tell mama ," withdrew from her sister and walked slowly up stairs .
" Perhaps you may not have heard that he is married ?"
and seemed almost ready to throw herself into his arms , when Colonel Brandon appeared .
said Emma again .
I should like to see two more here ,-- your pretty little friend , Miss Smith , and my son -- and then I should say we were quite complete .
Mary sat down for a moment , but it would not do ; she was sure Louisa had found a better seat somewhere else , and she would go on till she overtook her .
Who makes you their confidant ?"
The superior degree of confidence towards Harriet , which this one article marked , gave her severe pain .
He has had great faults , faults of inconsideration and thoughtlessness ; and I am very much of his opinion in thinking him likely to be happier than he deserves : but still as he is , beyond a doubt , really attached to Miss Fairfax , and will soon , it may be hoped , have the advantage of being constantly with her , I am very ready to believe his character will improve , and acquire from hers the steadiness and delicacy of principle that it wants .
And the same may be said of Mrs . Jeffereys -- Clara Partridge , that was -- and of the two Milmans , now Mrs . Bird and Mrs . James Cooper ; and of more than I can enumerate .
" Yes -- I have some right to that knowledge ; though I have never been at the place in my life .-- She is an odd woman !-- But I never allow myself to speak ill of her , on Frank ' s account ; for I do believe her to be very fond of him .
She must be taken to their house ; all must go to their house ; and await the surgeon ' s arrival there .
Sir John Middleton was a good looking man about forty .
Though , perhaps , as the _Chaperon_ of the party -- _I_ never was in any circle -- exploring parties -- young ladies -- married women --"
But there is nothing at all of that nature in the letter .
She had seen too much of the world , to expect sudden or disinterested attachment anywhere , but her illness had proved to her that her landlady had a character to preserve , and would not use her ill ; and she had been particularly fortunate in her nurse , as a sister of her landlady , a nurse by profession , and who had always a home in that house when unemployed , chanced to be at liberty just in time to attend her .
The youthful infatuation of nineteen would naturally blind him to every thing but her beauty and good nature ; but the four succeeding years -- years , which if rationally spent , give such improvement to the understanding , must have opened his eyes to her defects of education , while the same period of time , spent on her side in inferior society and more frivolous pursuits , had perhaps robbed her of that simplicity which might once have given an interesting character to her beauty .
It was so long since Emma had been at the Abbey , that as soon as she was satisfied of her father ' s comfort , she was glad to leave him , and look around her ; eager to refresh and correct her memory with more particular observation , more exact understanding of a house and grounds which must ever be so interesting to her and all her family .
She was always a very affable and free - spoken young lady , and very civil behaved .
I have some notion of putting such a trimming as this to my white and silver poplin .
The contrast between the countenance and air of Mr . Knightley and Robert Martin was , at this moment , so strong to Emma ' s feelings , and so strong was the recollection of all that had so recently passed on Harriet ' s side , so fresh the sound of those words , spoken with such emphasis , " No , I hope I know better than to think of Robert Martin ," that she was really expecting the intelligence to prove , in some measure , premature .
I could not be happy with a man whose taste did not in every point coincide with my own .
The quiet , heart - felt satisfaction of the old lady , and the rapturous delight of her daughter -- who proved even too joyous to talk as usual , had been a gratifying , yet almost an affecting , scene .
They both eagerly and resolutely declined her invitation .
" Are you certain that no servant , no porter has left any letter or note ?"
By the bye , _that_ is almost enough to put one out of conceit with a niece .
" I never read one more to the purpose , certainly ."
He knows it to be so , by his promises and messages ; but if he wished to do it , it might be done .
the amiable , obliging , gentle Mr .
--
This was quite a new idea to Mrs . Dashwood ; she had never been used to find wit in the inattention of any one , and could not help looking with surprise at them both .
" If he is not here by the end of the week , I shall go after him ."
" I am particularly sorry , ma ' am ," said he , addressing Lady Middleton , " that I should receive this letter today , for it is on business which requires my immediate attendance in town ."
Little Charles does not mind a word I say , and Walter is growing quite as bad ."
It is Frank Churchill ' s duty to pay this attention to his father .
" And so you absolutely opened what was directed to her !
Duty , affection , every thing was disregarded .
Mr . Weston is such a good - humoured , pleasant , excellent man , that he thoroughly deserves a good wife ;-- and you would not have had Miss Taylor live with us for ever , and bear all my odd humours , when she might have a house of her own ?"
good I am sure .-- I see it in your countenance .
Can they have quarrelled ?
In Lady Russell ' s view , it was perfectly natural that Mr Elliot , at a mature time of life , should feel it a most desirable object , and what would very generally recommend him among all sensible people , to be on good terms with the head of his family ; the simplest process in the world of time upon a head naturally clear , and only erring in the heyday of youth .
This was a cruel aggravation of actually straitened means .
He is so droll !
Her heart was grieved for a state which seemed but the more pitiable from this sort of irritation of spirits , inconsistency of action , and inequality of powers ; and it mortified her that she was given so little credit for proper feeling , or esteemed so little worthy as a friend : but she had the consolation of knowing that her intentions were good , and of being able to say to herself , that could Mr . Knightley have been privy to all her attempts of assisting Jane Fairfax , could he even have seen into her heart , he would not , on this occasion , have found any thing to reprove .
" Bond Street , January .
By their uncertain light she thought she could discern it to be drawn by four horses ; and this , while it told the excess of her poor mother ' s alarm , gave some explanation to such unexpected rapidity .
Mr . Cole said how much taste you had ; and Mr . Frank Churchill talked a great deal about your taste , and that he valued taste much more than execution ."
Her eyes were towards Donwell as she walked , but she saw him not .
They all met , and were introduced .
She only attempted to say , " How do you do ?
was his reply , but not at all in anger .
I want to see you permanently well connected , and to that end it will be advisable to have as few odd acquaintance as may be ; and , therefore , I say that if you should still be in this country when Mr . Martin marries , I wish you may not be drawn in by your intimacy with the sisters , to be acquainted with the wife , who will probably be some mere farmer ' s daughter , without education ."
But she could not be long ungrateful ; he was sacrificing an engagement at a gunsmith ' s , to be of use to her ; and she set off with him , with no feeling but gratitude apparent .
She had no natural connexions to assist her even with their counsel , and she could not afford to purchase the assistance of the law .
Extend it a little farther , and it will make me happy .
" Here have I ," said she , " actually talked poor Harriet into being very much attached to this man .
I must feel -- I must be wretched -- and they are welcome to enjoy the consciousness of it that can ."
But soon it came to be on one side ,
Emma was not sorry to be pressed .
said his wife , laughing .
I am sure Mr . Elton will lose no time in calling on him ; and we shall both have great pleasure in seeing him at the Vicarage ."
If any thing , you are too attentive .
I am sure if I knew of any thing she would like , I would send all over the town for it .
We shall only be making each other more angry .
The next moment she was tapping at her husband ' s dressing - room door , and as Anne followed her up stairs , she was in time for the whole conversation , which began with Mary ' s saying , in a tone of great exultation --
The grounds were declared to be highly beautiful , and Sir John , who was particularly warm in their praise , might be allowed to be a tolerable judge , for he had formed parties to visit them , at least , twice every summer for the last ten years .
Mrs . Jennings received the refusal with some surprise , and repeated her invitation immediately .
Must it not have been so , Marianne ?"
" Break it to me ," cried Emma , standing still with terror .-- " Good God !-- Mr .
" There can be no doubt of your being much more engaged with company than you used to be .
Do put up your horse at the Crown , and come in ."
Frosts will soon set in , and in all probability with severity .
I think you understand me , therefore ."
" Who could have thought it ?
" Why , their visit is but just begun !"
Amongst the objects in the scene , they soon discovered an animated one ; it was a man on horseback riding towards them .
This woman of whom he writes -- whoever she be -- or any one , in short , but your own dear self , mama , and Edward , may have been so barbarous to bely me .
The effect of his discourse on the lady too , could not escape her observation , for though she was too honorable to listen , and had even changed her seat , on purpose that she might NOT hear , to one close by the piano forte on which Marianne was playing , she could not keep herself from seeing that Elinor changed colour , attended with agitation , and was too intent on what he said to pursue her employment .-- Still farther in confirmation of her hopes , in the interval of Marianne ' s turning from one lesson to another , some words of the Colonel ' s inevitably reached her ear , in which he seemed to be apologising for the badness of his house .
Ferrars !"
" I was engaged elsewhere ."
I come now to the relation of a misfortune , which about this time befell Mrs . John Dashwood .
Emma continued ,
" And not known to him , perhaps , so soon ."
We have already agreed that secrecy may be necessary , and we must acknowledge that it could not be maintained if their correspondence were to pass through Sir John ' s hands ."
She soon resolved , equally as a duty and a pleasure , to employ half an hour of this holiday of spirits in calling on Miss Fairfax .-- She ought to go -- and she was longing to see her ; the resemblance of their present situations increasing every other motive of goodwill .
Harriet Smith might think herself not unworthy of being peculiarly , exclusively , passionately loved by Mr . Knightley .
This , and the manner in which it was said , immediately brought back to her remembrance all the circumstances of his quitting that place , with the uneasiness and suspicions they had caused to Mrs . Jennings , and she was fearful that her question had implied much more curiosity on the subject than she had ever felt .
Her love made no answer ; and after slightly bowing to the ladies , began complaining of the weather .
It was made a great favour of ; and altogether it was more than I could bear ; and so I never would finish it , to have it apologised over as an unfavourable likeness , to every morning visitor in Brunswick Square ;-- and , as I said , I did then forswear ever drawing any body again .
You will excuse her not coming to you -- she is not able -- she is gone into her own room -- I want her to lie down upon the bed .
I hope you are quite well .
They had been meeting almost every day since his arrival .
Why had not Miss Woodhouse revived the former good old days of the room ?-- She who could do any thing in Highbury !
They will be extremely glad to see you , I am sure ; and one of my servants shall go with you to shew you the way ."
Yet such was the case .
I am not at all afraid .
In general he was judged , throughout the parishes of Donwell and Highbury , with great candour ; liberal allowances were made for the little excesses of such a handsome young man -- one who smiled so often and bowed so well ; but there was one spirit among them not to be softened , from its power of censure , by bows or smiles -- Mr . Knightley .
He might be able to join them in the evening , but certainly not to dinner .
When they came to the steps , leading upwards from the beach , a gentleman , at the same moment preparing to come down , politely drew back , and stopped to give them way .
While Lady Elliot lived , there had been method , moderation , and economy , which had just kept him within his income ; but with her had died all such right - mindedness , and from that period he had been constantly exceeding it .
Highbury , the large and populous village , almost amounting to a town , to which Hartfield , in spite of its separate lawn , and shrubberies , and name , did really belong , afforded her no equals .
Anne had never entered Kellynch since her quitting Lady Russell ' s house in September .
" Some people imagine that there can be no accommodations , no space in a cottage ; but this is all a mistake .
There are people , who the more you do for them , the less they will do for themselves .
If she has fancied otherwise , her own wishes have misled her , and I am very sorry -- extremely sorry -- But , Miss Smith , indeed !-- Oh !
Elinor could only smile .
" Oh !
How very extraordinary !
Do not tell his father , but that young man is not quite the thing .
I do not perceive how you could express yourself more warmly ."
She was born to discover the falsehood of her own opinions , and to counteract , by her conduct , her most favourite maxims .
She could not speak the name , and look straight forward to Lady Russell ' s eye , till she had adopted the expedient of telling her briefly what she thought of the attachment between him and Louisa .
Mrs . Dashwood now looked at her daughter ; but Elinor knew better than to expect them .
" I am so glad we are got acquainted at last ," continued Charlotte .--" And now I hope we shall always be great friends .
Never had she felt so agitated , mortified , grieved , at any circumstance in her life .
At last , Lady Russell drew back her head .
but they ought to call upon you as soon as possible .
" Is there no chance of my seeing you and your sisters in town this winter , Miss Dashwood ?"
She spoke as she felt , with earnest regret and solicitude -- sincerely wishing that the circumstances which she collected from Miss Bates to be now actually determined on , might be as much for Miss Fairfax ' s advantage and comfort as possible .
" Dear me !
Here ceased the rapid flow of her self - reproving spirit ; and Elinor , impatient to soothe , though too honest to flatter , gave her instantly that praise and support which her frankness and her contrition so well deserved .
" My poor dear Isabella ," said he , fondly taking her hand , and interrupting , for a few moments , her busy labours for some one of her five children --" How long it is , how terribly long since you were here !
" A man cannot be more so ," was his short , full answer .
But here is my father coming : you will not object to my reading the charade to him .
" It would not be a great match for her ; but if Henrietta liked him ,"-- and Henrietta did seem to like him .
Emma , you are a great dreamer , I think ?"
For , though shy , he did not seem reserved ; it had rather the appearance of feelings glad to burst their usual restraints ; and having talked of poetry , the richness of the present age , and gone through a brief comparison of opinion as to the first - rate poets , trying to ascertain whether Marmion or The Lady of the Lake were to be preferred , and how ranked the Giaour and The Bride of Abydos ; and moreover , how the Giaour was to be pronounced , he showed himself so intimately acquainted with all the tenderest songs of the one poet , and all the impassioned descriptions of hopeless agony of the other ; he repeated , with such tremulous feeling , the various lines which imaged a broken heart , or a mind destroyed by wretchedness , and looked so entirely as if he meant to be understood , that she ventured to hope he did not always read only poetry , and to say , that she thought it was the misfortune of poetry to be seldom safely enjoyed by those who enjoyed it completely ; and that the strong feelings which alone could estimate it truly were the very feelings which ought to taste it but sparingly .
She could never quit him ."
The Miss Musgroves were not at all tired , and Mary was either offended , by not being asked before any of the others , or what Louisa called the Elliot pride could not endure to make a third in a one horse chaise .
Will not this manner of speaking of him , Mrs Smith , convince you that he is nothing to me ?
Mr . Weston would take no denial ; they must all dine at Randalls one day ;-- even Mr . Woodhouse was persuaded to think it a possible thing in preference to a division of the party .
" Yes , upon my word , very considerable .
That her sister ' s affections WERE calm , she dared not deny , though she blushed to acknowledge it ; and of the strength of her own , she gave a very striking proof , by still loving and respecting that sister , in spite of this mortifying conviction .
So I begged he would not -- for really as to ours being gone , I could not absolutely say that we had a great many left -- it was but half a dozen indeed ; but they should be all kept for Jane ; and I could not at all bear that he should be sending us more , so liberal as he had been already ; and Jane said the same .
But if she DID , the letter was written and sent away with a privacy which eluded all her watchfulness to ascertain the fact .
pressing his own with emotion .
With strong concern , and with many reproaches for not being called to their aid , did Mrs . Jennings hear in the morning of what had passed .
Nothing wrong in him escaped her .
She thought it probable that as they lived in the same county , Mrs . Palmer might be able to give some more particular account of Willoughby ' s general character , than could be gathered from the Middletons ' partial acquaintance with him ; and she was eager to gain from any one , such a confirmation of his merits as might remove the possibility of fear from Marianne .
Do not you think , Miss Elliot , we had better try to get him to Bath ?"
Mrs . Bates and Mrs . Elton were together .
The manner in which Miss Steele had spoken of Edward , increased her curiosity ; for it struck her as being rather ill - natured , and suggested the suspicion of that lady ' s knowing , or fancying herself to know something to his disadvantage .-- But her curiosity was unavailing , for no farther notice was taken of Mr . Ferrars ' s name by Miss Steele when alluded to , or even openly mentioned by Sir John .
Happily he was not farther from approving matrimony than from foreseeing it .-- Though always objecting to every marriage that was arranged , he never suffered beforehand from the apprehension of any ; it seemed as if he could not think so ill of any two persons ' understanding as to suppose they meant to marry till it were proved against them .
Could I mention any thing more fit to be done , than to go to Mrs . Goddard ?
She could not bear that her master should not be able to have another apple - tart this spring .
Fortunately for him , Highbury , including Randalls in the same parish , and Donwell Abbey in the parish adjoining , the seat of Mr . Knightley , comprehended many such .
" This is most kind , indeed !-- Miss Woodhouse , it is impossible for me to express -- I hope you will believe -- Excuse me for being so entirely without words ."
It was late in the morning before they returned home ; and no sooner had they entered the house than Marianne flew eagerly up stairs , and when Elinor followed , she found her turning from the table with a sorrowful countenance , which declared that no Willoughby had been there .
" We are all unanimous in that wish , I suppose ," said Elinor , " in spite of the insufficiency of wealth ."
Well , sir , the time must come when you will be paid for all this , when you will have little labour and great enjoyment ."
It seemed like the forerunner of something absolutely serious , which she did not wish .
But here there was nothing to be shifted off in a wild speculation on the future .
Mrs Charles Musgrove will , of course , wish to get back to her children ; but if Anne will stay , no one so proper , so capable as Anne ."
And I am sure I should not have the smallest fear of trusting YOU ; indeed , I should be very glad of your advice how to manage in such and uncomfortable situation as I am ; but , however , there is no occasion to trouble YOU .
" He is a man ," said Lady Russell , " whom I have no wish to see .
But , to be sure , Lucy would not give ear to such kind of talking ; so she told him directly ( with a great deal about sweet and love , you know , and all that -- Oh , la !
He put the letter into Elinor ' s hands .
My dearest Anne , it would give me more delight than is often felt at my time of life !"
" Intimately ."
" Oh , the difference of situation and habit !
The present crisis , indeed , seemed to be brought on by them ; and those misunderstandings might very possibly arise from the impropriety of his conduct ."
Captain Wentworth , who had caught her up , knelt with her in his arms , looking on her with a face as pallid as her own , in an agony of silence .
" It was you , and not your sister , I find , that my brother had the pleasure of being acquainted with , when he was in this country ."
" Did not I tell you , Sir John , when you spoke to me about it before , that it could not be done ?
" What !"
The looking over his letter again , in replying to it , had such a softening tendency , that it was particularly necessary to brace her up with a few decisive expressions ; and she was so very much concerned at the idea of making him unhappy , and thought so much of what his mother and sisters would think and say , and was so anxious that they should not fancy her ungrateful , that Emma believed if the young man had come in her way at that moment , he would have been accepted after all .
It was very lucky , for I would not have had poor James think himself slighted upon any account ; and I am sure she will make a very good servant : she is a civil , pretty - spoken girl ; I have a great opinion of her .
repeated Elinor within herself , regarding her sister with uneasiness .
" Well may you wonder , Marianne ," replied her brother , " at the obstinacy which could resist such arguments as these .
Mary had shewn herself disobliging to him , and was now to reap the consequence , which consequence was his dropping her arm almost every moment to cut off the heads of some nettles in the hedge with his switch ; and when Mary began to complain of it , and lament her being ill - used , according to custom , in being on the hedge side , while Anne was never incommoded on the other , he dropped the arms of both to hunt after a weasel which he had a momentary glance of , and they could hardly get him along at all .
We asked him to come home with us for a day or two : Charles undertook to give him some shooting , and he seemed quite delighted , and , for my part , I thought it was all settled ; when behold !
" Me !"
Your father thought only of THEM .
To consult with Colonel Brandon on the best means of effecting the latter , was a thought which immediately followed the resolution of its performance ; and as soon she had rung up the maid to take her place by her sister , she hastened down to the drawing - room , where she knew he was generally to be found at a much later hour than the present .
Mr . Woodhouse considered eight persons at dinner together as the utmost that his nerves could bear -- and here would be a ninth -- and Emma apprehended that it would be a ninth very much out of humour at not being able to come even to Hartfield for forty - eight hours without falling in with a dinner - party .
Miss Bates , deceived by the mock ceremony of her manner , did not immediately catch her meaning ; but , when it burst on her , it could not anger , though a slight blush shewed that it could pain her .
It was fixed accordingly , that Mrs Clay should be of the party in the carriage ; and they had just reached this point , when Anne , as she sat near the window , descried , most decidedly and distinctly , Captain Wentworth walking down the street .
But perhaps if she were to leave the room vacant , we might not be invited .
" Poor Miss Taylor !-- I wish she were here again .
I felt for my sister most severely .
Poor soul !
She stopped to breathe .
The surgeon was with them almost before it had seemed possible .
" She is not entirely without it , I think ."
The party was rather large , as it included one other family , a proper unobjectionable country family , whom the Coles had the advantage of naming among their acquaintance , and the male part of Mr . Cox ' s family , the lawyer of Highbury .
Consider what you are about .
Everything united in him ; good understanding , correct opinions , knowledge of the world , and a warm heart .
It was easy to decide that she was still too young ; and Jane remained with them , sharing , as another daughter , in all the rational pleasures of an elegant society , and a judicious mixture of home and amusement , with only the drawback of the future , the sobering suggestions of her own good understanding to remind her that all this might soon be over .
She would not wound the feelings of her sister on any account , and yet to say what she did not believe was impossible .
She found that she had been misled by the careful , the considerate attention of her daughter , to think the attachment , which once she had so well understood , much slighter in reality , than she had been wont to believe , or than it was now proved to be .
Who is to dance ?"
I will keep my ill - humour to myself .
The sudden termination of Colonel Brandon ' s visit at the park , with his steadiness in concealing its cause , filled the mind , and raised the wonder of Mrs . Jennings for two or three days ; she was a great wonderer , as every one must be who takes a very lively interest in all the comings and goings of all their acquaintance .
It is a very fair match , as times go ; and I have liked Charles Hayter all my life , and I shall not leave off now ."
" You were living with your husband , and were the only woman on board ."
yes , perfectly .-- Why do you make a doubt of it ?"
He so frequently talked of the increasing expenses of housekeeping , and of the perpetual demands upon his purse , which a man of any consequence in the world was beyond calculation exposed to , that he seemed rather to stand in need of more money himself than to have any design of giving money away .
Edward ' s marriage with Lucy was as firmly determined on , and the time of its taking place remained as absolutely uncertain , as she had concluded it would be ;-- every thing depended , exactly after her expectation , on his getting that preferment , of which , at present , there seemed not the smallest chance .
Elinor turned involuntarily to Marianne , to see whether it could be unobserved by her .
" Yes ."
There was too much domestic happiness in his brother ' s house ; woman wore too amiable a form in it ; Isabella was too much like Emma -- differing only in those striking inferiorities , which always brought the other in brilliancy before him , for much to have been done , even had his time been longer .-- He had stayed on , however , vigorously , day after day -- till this very morning ' s post had conveyed the history of Jane Fairfax .-- Then , with the gladness which must be felt , nay , which he did not scruple to feel , having never believed Frank Churchill to be at all deserving Emma , was there so much fond solicitude , so much keen anxiety for her , that he could stay no longer .
" _I_ sick of prosperity and indulgence !
Miss Bates , in her real anxiety for Jane , could hardly stay even to be grateful , before she stept forward and put an end to all farther singing .
You are extremely troublesome .
" You surprise me very much .
Lady Russell was extremely sorry that such a measure should have been resorted to at all , wondered , grieved , and feared ; and the affront it contained to Anne , in Mrs Clay ' s being of so much use , while Anne could be of none , was a very sore aggravation .
said she , as they proceeded -- speaking more to assist Mr . Weston in keeping his secret , than with any other view .
Oh !
In a moment he went on --
His good sense and good principles would delight you .-- As far as the man is concerned , you could not wish your friend in better hands .
" I am extremely glad to hear it , upon my word ; extremely glad indeed .
They passed some months in great happiness at Dawlish ; for she had many relations and old acquaintances to cut -- and he drew several plans for magnificent cottages ;-- and from thence returning to town , procured the forgiveness of Mrs . Ferrars , by the simple expedient of asking it , which , at Lucy ' s instigation , was adopted .
She could think only of the invitation she had with such astonishment witnessed , and of the manner in which it had been received ; a manner of doubtful meaning , of surprise rather than gratification , of polite acknowledgement rather than acceptance .
She blushed at this hint ; but it was even visibly gratifying to her ; and after a ten minutes ' interval of earnest thought , she came to her sister again , and said with great good humour , " Perhaps , Elinor , it WAS rather ill - judged in me to go to Allenham ; but Mr . Willoughby wanted particularly to shew me the place ; and it is a charming house , I assure you .-- There is one remarkably pretty sitting room up stairs ; of a nice comfortable size for constant use , and with modern furniture it would be delightful .
She determined , after some consideration , that if appearances continued many days longer as unpleasant as they now were , she would represent in the strongest manner to her mother the necessity of some serious enquiry into the affair .
Mrs . Weston was convinced that such conversation must be the greatest relief to her companion , pent up within her own mind as every thing had so long been , and was very much pleased with all that she had said on the subject .
But while I visit at Hartfield , and you are so kind to me , Miss Woodhouse , I am not afraid of what any body can do ."
A letter arrived from Mr . Churchill to urge his nephew ' s instant return .
Mrs Smith said nothing .
" Was he agreeable ?"
Aye , I remember it all now ; all , except your saving this relic -- I knew nothing of that till this moment -- but the cutting the finger , and my recommending court - plaister , and saying I had none about me !-- Oh !
" My dear sir , upon no account in the world ; my father can direct me ."
From Monday next to Saturday , I assure you we have not a disengaged day !-- A woman with fewer resources than I have , need not have been at a loss ."
It has been dignified and liberal .
The persons to be invited , required little thought .
This was against her ; but on the other hand , he spent so much of his time at Uppercross , that in removing thence she might be considered rather as leaving him behind , than as going towards him ; and , upon the whole , she believed she must , on this interesting question , be the gainer , almost as certainly as in her change of domestic society , in leaving poor Mary for Lady Russell .
The time was now drawing on , when Colonel Brandon might be expected back .
CHAPTER VI
They all rose up in preparation for a round game .
Mr . Woodhouse agreed to it all , but added ,
" My friend Mr . Perry !
" Captain Wentworth , which way are you going ?
" I hope every body had a pleasant evening ," said Mr . Woodhouse , in his quiet way .
here it is .
" You are extremely kind ," replied Miss Bates , highly gratified ; " you who are such a judge , and write so beautifully yourself .
I thought it very well done of him indeed .
But you really frightened me .
Would she recollect him ?
No lurking horrors were to upbraid him for his easy credulity .
The youth and cheerfulness of morning are in happy analogy , and of powerful operation ; and if the distress be not poignant enough to keep the eyes unclosed , they will be sure to open to sensations of softened pain and brighter hope .
" I thank you ; but I assure you you are quite mistaken .
Perhaps she might have passed over more had his manners been flattering to Isabella ' s sister , but they were only those of a calmly kind brother and friend , without praise and without blindness ; but hardly any degree of personal compliment could have made her regardless of that greatest fault of all in her eyes which he sometimes fell into , the want of respectful forbearance towards her father .
She felt herself ill - used and unfortunate , as did her father ; and they were neither of them able to devise any means of lessening their expenses without compromising their dignity , or relinquishing their comforts in a way not to be borne .
" My dearest Emma , do not pretend , with your sweet temper , to understand a bad one , or to lay down rules for it : you must let it go its own way .
Secrecy may be advisable ; but still I cannot help wondering at its being practiced by him ."
" I have never been able ," continued Lucy , " to give him my picture in return , which I am very much vexed at , for he has been always so anxious to get it !
The real state of things between Willoughby and her sister was so little known to herself , that in endeavouring to explain it , she might be as liable to say too much as too little .
" You have , I believe , and know the whole ."
" Well ," said he , in a deliberating manner , " for five minutes , perhaps ."
It is very hard indeed that she should not have a little pleasure , because Miss Dashwood does not wish it .
He was so much displeased , that it was longer than usual before he came to Hartfield again ; and when they did meet , his grave looks shewed that she was not forgiven .
And as to conceit , he is the farthest from it of any man I know .
I consider him with great respect .
YOU must have seen the difference as well as I .
I cannot produce written proof again , but I can give as authentic oral testimony as you can desire , of what he is now wanting , and what he is now doing .
However , when I read on , I found it was not near so bad as I had fancied at first ; and I make so light of it now to her , that she does not think much about it .
The instrument was unlocked , every body prepared to be charmed , and Marianne , who sang very well , at their request went through the chief of the songs which Lady Middleton had brought into the family on her marriage , and which perhaps had lain ever since in the same position on the pianoforte , for her ladyship had celebrated that event by giving up music , although by her mother ' s account , she had played extremely well , and by her own was very fond of it .
You CAN have no grief ."
" I do not know .
Captain Harville had taken his present house for half a year ; his taste , and his health , and his fortune , all directing him to a residence inexpensive , and by the sea ; and the grandeur of the country , and the retirement of Lyme in the winter , appeared exactly adapted to Captain Benwick ' s state of mind .
" Then ," cried Mrs . Jennings with blunt sincerity , no longer able to be silent , " he has acted like an honest man !
And is she , at seventeen , just entering into life , just beginning to be known , to be wondered at because she does not accept the first offer she receives ?
Mrs . Dashwood had never been so much pleased with any young women in her life , as she was with them ; had given each of them a needle book made by some emigrant ; called Lucy by her Christian name ; and did not know whether she should ever be able to part with them .
He came four times a day for a week .
" The Laconia had come into Plymouth the week before ; no danger of her being sent to sea again .
Have patience with me , I shall soon have done .-- She closed with this offer , resolving to break with me entirely , and wrote the next day to tell me that we never were to meet again .-- _She_ _felt_ _the_ _engagement_ _to_ _be_ _a_ _source_ _of_ _repentance_ _and_ _misery_ _to_ _each_ : _she_ _dissolved_ _it_ .-- This letter reached me on the very morning of my poor aunt ' s death .
But you may be assured that I would not sacrifice one sentiment of local attachment of yours , or of any one whom I loved , for all the improvements in the world .
" My love , it will be scarcely a separation .
Her heart had been long growing kinder towards Jane ; and this picture of her present sufferings acted as a cure of every former ungenerous suspicion , and left her nothing but pity ; and the remembrance of the less just and less gentle sensations of the past , obliged her to admit that Jane might very naturally resolve on seeing Mrs . Cole or any other steady friend , when she might not bear to see herself .
He was warm in his reprobation of Mr . Elton ' s conduct ; it had been unpardonable rudeness ; and Mrs . Elton ' s looks also received the due share of censure .
" Certainly ," returned Mrs . John Dashwood .
One morning , about ten days after Mrs . Churchill ' s decease , Emma was called downstairs to Mr . Weston , who " could not stay five minutes , and wanted particularly to speak with her ."
The setting always casts a different shade on it , you know ."
They might chuse to surprize her ."
To her it was real enjoyment to be with the Westons .
Emma ' s only surprize was that Jane Fairfax should accept those attentions and tolerate Mrs . Elton as she seemed to do .
" But I ," he soon added , " who have had no such charm thrown over my senses , must still see , hear , and remember .
Do not pity me till I saw her wan , sick looks .-- I reached Highbury at the time of day when , from my knowledge of their late breakfast hour , I was certain of a good chance of finding her alone .-- I was not disappointed ; and at last I was not disappointed either in the object of my journey .
It was not merely complaisance , it must be a liking to the cause , which made him enter warmly into her father and sister ' s solicitudes on a subject which she thought unworthy to excite them .
Mrs . Bates , Mrs . Perry , Mrs . Goddard and others , were a good deal behind - hand in knowledge of the world , but she would soon shew them how every thing ought to be arranged .
Marianne looked very grave and said nothing .
The disguise , equivocation , mystery , so hateful to her to practise , might soon be over .
Henrietta remained with Louisa ; but all the rest of the family were again in their usual quarters .
At my time of life opinions are tolerably fixed .
The truth is , Harriet , that my playing is just good enough to be praised , but Jane Fairfax ' s is much beyond it ."
" I have just had the honour of receiving your letter , for which I beg to return my sincere acknowledgments .
" Not at all .
What Mrs . Ferrars would say and do , though there could not be a doubt of its nature , she was anxious to hear ; and still more anxious to know how Edward would conduct himself .
Because they neither flattered herself nor her children , she could not believe them good - natured ; and because they were fond of reading , she fancied them satirical : perhaps without exactly knowing what it was to be satirical ; but THAT did not signify .
Upon my word , Perry has restored her in a wonderful short time !-- Oh !
You are endeavouring to disarm me by reason , and to convince me against my will .
I speak from experience .
Dear , sweet Louisa !"
Her former apprehensions , now with greater reason restored , left her no doubt of the event ; and though trying to speak comfort to Elinor , her conviction of her sister ' s danger would not allow her to offer the comfort of hope .
Yes , we DO know it all .
Knowing all this , as I have now known it many weeks , guess what I must have felt on seeing your sister as fond of him as ever , and on being assured that she was to marry him : guess what I must have felt for all your sakes .
I know you are attached to them ."
He asked my opinion as to what he was now to do .
I think not .
" I am almost certain that the meeting at the Crown is not till to - morrow .-- Mr .
And at any rate , she lost nothing by continuing the engagement , for she has proved that it fettered neither her inclination nor her actions .
Emma hoped it must rapidly work Harriet ' s cure ; but the sensations which could prompt such behaviour sunk them both very much .-- It was not to be doubted that poor Harriet ' s attachment had been an offering to conjugal unreserve , and her own share in the story , under a colouring the least favourable to her and the most soothing to him , had in all likelihood been given also .
" I do not know ."
Where the wound had been given , there must the cure be found if anywhere ; and Emma felt that , till she saw her in the way of cure , there could be no true peace for herself .
I am sure I never suspected it , you did it so naturally ."
He paused a moment , again smiling , with his eyes fixed on her face .
I am sure they will like her extremely ; and when she gets a little acquainted with them , her fears will completely wear off , for there really is nothing in the manners of either but what is highly conciliating .-- I shall have her very often indeed while they are with me , and I dare say we shall sometimes find a seat for her in the barouche - landau in some of our exploring parties ."
" There appeared such a perfectly good understanding among them all --" he began rather quickly , but checking himself , added , " however , it is impossible for me to say on what terms they really were -- how it might all be behind the scenes .
Who had been at pains to give Harriet notions of self - consequence but herself ?-- Who but herself had taught her , that she was to elevate herself if possible , and that her claims were great to a high worldly establishment ?-- If Harriet , from being humble , were grown vain , it was her doing too .
Mrs . Dashwood , not less watchful of what passed than her daughter , but with a mind very differently influenced , and therefore watching to very different effect , saw nothing in the Colonel ' s behaviour but what arose from the most simple and self - evident sensations , while in the actions and words of Marianne she persuaded herself to think that something more than gratitude already dawned .
If it be not inconvenient to you , pray let us go in , that I may prove myself to belong to the place , to be a true citizen of Highbury .
' My dear Courtland ,' said I , immediately throwing them all into the fire , ' do not adopt either of them , but by all means build a cottage .'
The matter itself I could not deny , and vain was every endeavour to soften it .
" I should say so , but that I suppose there may be a hundred different ways of being in love .
I happened to look up as I went by the chaise , and so I see directly it was the youngest Miss Steele ; so I took off my hat , and she knew me and called to me , and inquired after you , ma ' am , and the young ladies , especially Miss Marianne , and bid me I should give her compliments and Mr . Ferrars ' s , their best compliments and service , and how sorry they was they had not time to come on and see you , but they was in a great hurry to go forwards , for they was going further down for a little while , but howsever , when they come back , they ' d make sure to come and see you ."
[ At this point in the first and second edtions , Volume II ended .]
He saw his son every year in London , and was proud of him ; and his fond report of him as a very fine young man had made Highbury feel a sort of pride in him too .
Anne , seeing her friend to be earnestly bent on it , did as she was desired .
Her mother was surprised , and Elinor again became uneasy .
They are very fond of being at Hartfield , Harriet ."
She was obliged to stop and think .
It is not likely that I _should_ , considering what I have been used to .
I had a vast deal more to say to you , but I must not stay away from them not any longer .
Their acquaintance was exceedingly sought after .
Oh !
Much beyond my hopes .
Mr . Dashwood ' s disappointment was , at first , severe ; but his temper was cheerful and sanguine ; and he might reasonably hope to live many years , and by living economically , lay by a considerable sum from the produce of an estate already large , and capable of almost immediate improvement .
` Oh !
" I think she must be here soon ," said he .
No sacrifice on any side worth the name .
He never can bear to be thanked .
They might advance rapidly if they would , however ; they must advance somehow or other whether they would or no .
He came , examined his patient , and though encouraging Miss Dashwood to expect that a very few days would restore her sister to health , yet , by pronouncing her disorder to have a putrid tendency , and allowing the word " infection " to pass his lips , gave instant alarm to Mrs . Palmer , on her baby ' s account .
" But I hate to hear you talking so like a fine gentleman , and as if women were all fine ladies , instead of rational creatures .
Her feelings made her speak low ; and Captain Wentworth , hearing only in part , and probably not having Dick Musgrove at all near his thoughts , looked rather in suspense , and as if waiting for more .
Elinor could NOT remember it ;-- but her mother , without waiting for her assent , continued ,
Situated as we are with Lady Dalrymple , cousins , we ought to be very careful not to embarrass her with acquaintance she might not approve .
One can see that she feels the want of encouragement .
Sometimes Mr . Elton predominated , sometimes the Martins ; and each was occasionally useful as a check to the other .
" That a gentleman , whom I had reason to think -- in short , that a man , whom I KNEW to be engaged -- but how shall I tell you ?
It was on the wedding - day of this beloved friend that Emma first sat in mournful thought of any continuance .
Mrs . Weston ought to have found more in it , for she had a husband whose warm heart and sweet temper made him think every thing due to her in return for the great goodness of being in love with him ; but though she had one sort of spirit , she had not the best .
Elinor made no answer .
" Her guardians , my dear .
."
It was not closed , however , it still remained ajar ; but by engaging the housekeeper in incessant conversation , she hoped to make it practicable for him to chuse his own subject in the adjoining room .
What !
Many a time has Selina said , when she has been going to Bristol , ` I really cannot get this girl to move from the house .
Do you think it will look well ?"
I told you that I did not wonder at your attachment ; that considering the service he had rendered you , it was extremely natural :-- and you agreed to it , expressing yourself very warmly as to your sense of that service , and mentioning even what your sensations had been in seeing him come forward to your rescue .-- The impression of it is strong on my memory ."
" Had you ?"
" Never !
I took him as he was sleeping on the sofa , and it is as strong a likeness of his cockade as you would wish to see .
Escape , however , was not his plan .
The truth of this representation there was no denying .
She got up to examine them .
How nicely you talk ; I love to hear you .
They speedily discovered that their enjoyment of dancing and music was mutual , and that it arose from a general conformity of judgment in all that related to either .
Be observant of him .
I could do very well without it .
Sir Walter has resented it .
" I was six weeks with Edward ," said he , " and saw him happy .
There was a communication before her , one which _she_ only could be competent to make -- the confession of her engagement to her father ; but she would have nothing to do with it at present .-- She had resolved to defer the disclosure till Mrs . Weston were safe and well .
The dread of such a failure after all became the prominent uneasiness ; and when Harriet appeared , and in very good spirits , and without having any such reason to give for her long absence , she felt a satisfaction which settled her with her own mind , and convinced her , that let Mr . Knightley think or say what he would , she had done nothing which woman ' s friendship and woman ' s feelings would not justify .
She could imagine Mrs Clay to have said , that " now Miss Anne was come , she could not suppose herself at all wanted ;" for Elizabeth was replying in a sort of whisper , " That must not be any reason , indeed .
Pray do not make any more matches ."
Her observation had been pretty correct .
His first proposition and request , that the dance begun at Mr . Cole ' s should be finished there -- that the same party should be collected , and the same musician engaged , met with the readiest acquiescence .
But the case is altered now .
Anne ' s shudderings were to herself alone ; but the Miss Musgroves could be as open as they were sincere , in their exclamations of pity and horror .
He had followed her into the shrubbery with no idea of trying it .
A word was put in for a second young Cox ; and at last , Mr . Weston naming one family of cousins who must be included , and another of very old acquaintance who could not be left out , it became a certainty that the five couple would be at least ten , and a very interesting speculation in what possible manner they could be disposed of .
This letter must make its way to Emma ' s feelings .
It is not that mamma cares about it the least in the world , but I know it is taken notice of by many persons ."
" By all means , my dear ," cried Mrs Musgrove , " go home directly , and take care of yourself , that you may be fit for the evening .
a very agreeable young man to be sure ; I know him very well ."
Not to wait upon a bride is very remiss .
-- Yet he would be so anxious for her being perfectly warm , would be so interested about her father , and so delighted with Mrs . Weston ; and at last would begin admiring her drawings with so much zeal and so little knowledge as seemed terribly like a would - be lover , and made it some effort with her to preserve her good manners .
I have more pleasure in a snug farm - house than a watch - tower -- and a troop of tidy , happy villages please me better than the finest banditti in the world ."
Colonel Brandon ' s partiality for Marianne , which had so early been discovered by his friends , now first became perceptible to Elinor , when it ceased to be noticed by them .
He and his wife had taken their intended drive , and were returning home .
" Well ," said Emma , " there is no disputing about taste .-- At least you admire her except her complexion ."
She would catch a dreadful cold .
" That sweet , amiable Jane Fairfax !"
It was now some time since Miss Taylor had begun to influence his schemes ; but as it was not the tyrannic influence of youth on youth , it had not shaken his determination of never settling till he could purchase Randalls , and the sale of Randalls was long looked forward to ; but he had gone steadily on , with these objects in view , till they were accomplished .
I must tell you what an unlucky thing happened to me , as to that .
I should be surprized if , after seeing them , you could be in company with Mr . Martin again without perceiving him to be a very inferior creature -- and rather wondering at yourself for having ever thought him at all agreeable before .
" I do not think he is conceited either , in general ," said Harriet , her conscience opposing such censure ; " at least , he is very good natured , and I shall always feel much obliged to him , and have a great regard for -- but that is quite a different thing from -- and you know , though he may like me , it does not follow that I should -- and certainly I must confess that since my visiting here I have seen people -- and if one comes to compare them , person and manners , there is no comparison at all , _one_ is so very handsome and agreeable .
It was the beginning of February ; and Anne , having been a month in Bath , was growing very eager for news from Uppercross and Lyme .
" Yes ; which I objected to , but he would not regard .
-- Those were Miss Woodhouse ' s words , were they ?-- And a fine ending -- and there is the letter .
Anne had a moment ' s astonishment on the subject herself ; but it was soon lost in the pleasanter feelings which sprang from the sight of all the ingenious contrivances and nice arrangements of Captain Harville , to turn the actual space to the best account , to supply the deficiencies of lodging - house furniture , and defend the windows and doors against the winter storms to be expected .
Miss Hamilton had left school , had married not long afterwards , was said to have married a man of fortune , and this was all that Anne had known of her , till now that their governess ' s account brought her situation forward in a more decided but very different form .
" I guessed you would say so "-- replied Lucy quickly --" but there was no reason in the world why Mrs . Ferrars should seem to like me , if she did not , and her liking me is every thing .
here come the Richardsons .
" I am not supposing him at all an unnatural creature , in suspecting that he may have learnt to be above his connexions , and to care very little for any thing but his own pleasure , from living with those who have always set him the example of it .
I speak , you know , only of such men as have hearts !"
She now resolved to keep Harriet no longer in the dark .
Instead of forgetting him , his behaviour was such that she could not avoid the internal suggestion of " Can it really be as my brother imagined ?
this is too much flattery .
" Oh !
" Dear Edward !"
" By all the world , rather than by his own heart .
And I need not bring the whole family , you know ."
Surry is the garden of England ."
" What does all that signify ?
But that he was for ever inconsolable , that he fled from society , or contracted an habitual gloom of temper , or died of a broken heart , must not be depended on -- for he did neither .
" I think very differently ," answered Elizabeth , shortly ; " an agreeable manner may set off handsome features , but can never alter plain ones .
Marianne got up and walked about the room .
As a friend of mine , of my family , he may , perhaps -- indeed I know he HAS , still greater pleasure in bestowing it ; but , upon my word , you owe nothing to my solicitation ."
VOLUME II
The mention of the Coles was sure to be followed by that of Mr . Elton .
You must get his consent before you ask mine ."
I do not know what you and Mr . Willoughby will do between you about her .
I could never doubt that you would be loved and sought by others , but I knew to a certainty that you had refused one man , at least , of better pretensions than myself ; and I could not help often saying , ` Was this for me ?'"
Mrs . Weston , if there were an account drawn up of the evil and the good I have done Miss Fairfax !-- Well ( checking herself , and trying to be more lively ), this is all to be forgotten .
She was of strict integrity herself , with a delicate sense of honour ; but she was as desirous of saving Sir Walter ' s feelings , as solicitous for the credit of the family , as aristocratic in her ideas of what was due to them , as anybody of sense and honesty could well be .
Anne could not refuse ; but never had she sacrificed to politeness with a more suffering spirit .
All this is much , very much in favour of their happiness ; more than perhaps --"
" If I made myself intelligible yesterday , this letter will be expected ; but expected or not , I know it will be read with candour and indulgence .-- You are all goodness , and I believe there will be need of even all your goodness to allow for some parts of my past conduct .-- But I have been forgiven by one who had still more to resent .
On such a subject ," sighing heavily , " can I have little temptation to be diffuse ."
Business on Sir John ' s part , and a violent cold on her own , prevented their calling in Berkeley Street .
I really am ashamed of always leading the way ."
" You must remember , my dear mother , that I have never considered this matter as certain .
" Me !-- I suppose I smile for pleasure at Colonel Campbell ' s being so rich and so liberal .-- It is a handsome present ."
" And yet two thousand a - year is a very moderate income ," said Marianne .
" Who can this be ?"
How can you ?-- But the time will come I hope ... I am sure you will like him ."
She liked his open manners , but a little less of open - heartedness would have made him a higher character .-- General benevolence , but not general friendship , made a man what he ought to be .-- She could fancy such a man .
" I am not at all surprized at you , Harriet .
CHAPTER 45
She inherits her mother ' s talents , and must have been under subjection to her ."
It was no time for hesitation .
They must be taking off some trouble from the good people she was with ; they might at least relieve Mrs Harville from the care of her own children ; and in short , they were so happy in the decision , that Anne was delighted with what she had done , and felt that she could not spend her last morning at Uppercross better than in assisting their preparations , and sending them off at an early hour , though her being left to the solitary range of the house was the consequence .
His kindness in stepping forward to her relief , the manner , the silence in which it had passed , the little particulars of the circumstance , with the conviction soon forced on her by the noise he was studiously making with the child , that he meant to avoid hearing her thanks , and rather sought to testify that her conversation was the last of his wants , produced such a confusion of varying , but very painful agitation , as she could not recover from , till enabled by the entrance of Mary and the Miss Musgroves to make over her little patient to their cares , and leave the room .
The housekeeper declared she knew nothing of my being expected .-- Very extraordinary !-- And nobody knew at all which way he was gone .
" I did ," replied Emma , " and they cannot forgive me ."
When I talked of a whole history , therefore , you see I was not romancing so much as you supposed ."
cried Mr . Knightley .
This must not be ."
" No , no ," cried Marianne , " misery such as mine has no pride .
She believed she had been foolish , but it had alarmed her , and she had been within half a minute of sending for Mr . Perry .
so charming as you are !"
He might have doubled his presumption to me -- but poor Harriet !"
When the dessert and the wine were arranged , and Mrs . Dashwood and Elinor were left by themselves , they remained long together in a similarity of thoughtfulness and silence .
He shook his head ; but there was a smile of indulgence with it , and he only said ,
He does not read ?"
He recommended it for all the children , but particularly for the weakness in little Bella ' s throat ,-- both sea air and bathing ."
Nothing , but to grow more worthy of him , whose intentions and judgment had been ever so superior to her own .
Elinor could not be surprised at their attachment .
That was just like Lucy .-- Poor soul !
It was very natural for you to say , what right has he to lecture me ?-- and I am afraid very natural for you to feel that it was done in a disagreeable manner .
" Such excellent parents as Mr and Mrs Musgrove ," exclaimed Anne , " should be happy in their children ' s marriages .
The lady would probably have passed without suspicion , had he not convinced Miss Dashwood that what concerned her ought not to escape his lips .
" Oh , ho !-- I understand you .
She needed no time for deliberation or inquiry .
Ay , it is a fine thing to be young and handsome .
Anxious to separate herself from them as far as she could , she soon afterwards took possession of a narrow footpath , a little raised on one side of the lane , leaving them together in the main road .
" Oh , no ; but if mama had not objected to it , I dare say he would have liked it of all things .
Mrs . John Dashwood saw the packages depart with a sigh : she could not help feeling it hard that as Mrs . Dashwood ' s income would be so trifling in comparison with their own , she should have any handsome article of furniture .
" Look here ," said he , unfolding a parcel in his hand , and displaying a small miniature painting , " do you know who that is ?"
The terror which the woman and boy had been creating in Harriet was then their own portion .
" We have been calling at Randalls ," said she , " and found them both at home ; and very pleasant people they seem to be .
" There is no persuading you to change your mind , Brandon , I know of old ," said Sir John , " when once you are determined on anything .
Lord !
Do try to find it out , Miss Woodhouse .
For the present , he could not be spared , to his " very great mortification and regret ; but still he looked forward with the hope of coming to Randalls at no distant period ."
" If the impertinent remarks of Mrs . Jennings are to be the proof of impropriety in conduct , we are all offending every moment of our lives .
It would be most right , and most wise , and , therefore must involve least suffering to go with the others .
And , by the bye , every body ought to have two pair of spectacles ; they should indeed .
Why would you be persuaded by my uncle , Sir Robert , against your own judgment , to place Edward under private tuition , at the most critical time of his life ?
I used to boast of my own Anne Elliot , and vouch for your being a very different creature from --"
She had received ideas which disposed her to be courteous and kind to all , and to pity every one , as being less happy than herself .
you would not earn a very good livelihood as a working silversmith at this rate ."
" Oh !
" Nay , I had it from you .
I have been always used to a very small income , and could struggle with any poverty for him ; but I love him too well to be the selfish means of robbing him , perhaps , of all that his mother might give him if he married to please her .
I dare say he has ; and though it may cut him off from some advantages , it will secure him many others ."
Captain Wentworth talked of going there again himself , it was only seventeen miles from Uppercross ; though November , the weather was by no means bad ; and , in short , Louisa , who was the most eager of the eager , having formed the resolution to go , and besides the pleasure of doing as she liked , being now armed with the idea of merit in maintaining her own way , bore down all the wishes of her father and mother for putting it off till summer ; and to Lyme they were to go -- Charles , Mary , Anne , Henrietta , Louisa , and Captain Wentworth .
Had not Elinor , in the sad countenance of her sister , seen a check to all mirth , she could have been entertained by Mrs . Jennings ' s endeavours to cure a disappointment in love , by a variety of sweetmeats and olives , and a good fire .
--, Pall Mall .
There was no time for farther remark or explanation .
The two families had always been on excellent terms , there being no pride on one side , and no envy on the other , and only such a consciousness of superiority in the Miss Musgroves , as made them pleased to improve their cousins .
It was on this point that she had hoped to engage Anne ' s good offices with Mr Elliot .
The idea of Louisa Musgrove turned into a person of literary taste , and sentimental reflection was amusing , but she had no doubt of its being so .
But you were humble .
I think you must know Hartfield enough to comprehend that ."
or in the anxious supplement from Mary , of -- " Upon my word , I shall be pretty well off , when you are all gone away to be happy at Bath !"
I could think of you only as one who had yielded , who had given me up , who had been influenced by any one rather than by me .
It is a mere nothing after all ; and not the least draught from the stairs ."
Willing therefore to delay the evil hour , she resolved to wait till her sister ' s health were more secure , before she appointed it .
" I do remember it ," cried Emma ; " I perfectly remember it .-- Talking about spruce - beer .-- Oh !
Fourteen minutes to be given to those with whom she had thankfully passed six weeks not six months ago !-- Emma could not but picture it all , and feel how justly they might resent , how naturally Harriet must suffer .
A little quickness of voice there is which rather hurts the ear .
He proceeded a little farther , reading to himself ; and then , with a smile , observed , " Humph !
I shall not discuss it here .
The weather soon improved enough for those to move who must move ; and Mr . Woodhouse having , as usual , tried to persuade his daughter to stay behind with all her children , was obliged to see the whole party set off , and return to his lamentations over the destiny of poor Isabella ;-- which poor Isabella , passing her life with those she doated on , full of their merits , blind to their faults , and always innocently busy , might have been a model of right feminine happiness .
ma ' am , but there may be a difficulty .
Where can you look for a more suitable match ?
One cannot have too large a party .
Why did not you ask the Gilberts to come to us today ?"
Charming people , Mr . and Mrs . Weston ;-- Mrs . Weston indeed is much beyond praise , and he is exactly what one values , so hospitable , and so fond of society ;-- it will be a small party , but where small parties are select , they are perhaps the most agreeable of any .
cried Marianne .
This was dreadful .
And , upon my word , I do not think Mr . Knightley would be much disturbed by Miss Bates .
Everybody was wanting to visit them .
I shall have no fears for you with him .
That some kind of engagement had subsisted between Willoughby and Marianne she could not doubt , and that Willoughby was weary of it , seemed equally clear ; for however Marianne might still feed her own wishes , SHE could not attribute such behaviour to mistake or misapprehension of any kind .
so silly -- so satisfied -- so smiling -- so prosing -- so undistinguishing and unfastidious -- and so apt to tell every thing relative to every body about me , I would marry to - morrow .
Mr . and Mrs . John Knightley were not detained long at Hartfield .
No , these were noises which belonged to the winter pleasures ; her spirits rose under their influence ; and like Mrs Musgrove , she was feeling , though not saying , that after being long in the country , nothing could be so good for her as a little quiet cheerfulness .
" I am very much astonished , Mr . Elton .
I care not who knows that I am wretched .
" He thinks Mrs Clay afraid of him , aware that he sees through her , and not daring to proceed as she might do in his absence .
She could not stand it .
No one had ever come within the Kellynch circle , who could bear a comparison with Frederick Wentworth , as he stood in her memory .
After a visit on Colonel Brandon ' s side of only three or four days , the two gentlemen quitted Barton together .-- They were to go immediately to Delaford , that Edward might have some personal knowledge of his future home , and assist his patron and friend in deciding on what improvements were needed to it ; and from thence , after staying there a couple of nights , he was to proceed on his journey to town .
One man ' s style must not be the rule of another ' s .
Knightley !-- I could not have believed it .
She saw with maternal complacency all the impertinent encroachments and mischievous tricks to which her cousins submitted .
The word _home_ made his father look on him with fresh complacency .
Till this year , every long vacation since their marriage had been divided between Hartfield and Donwell Abbey ; but all the holidays of this autumn had been given to sea - bathing for the children , and it was therefore many months since they had been seen in a regular way by their Surry connexions , or seen at all by Mr . Woodhouse , who could not be induced to get so far as London , even for poor Isabella ' s sake ; and who consequently was now most nervously and apprehensively happy in forestalling this too short visit .
I could not walk half so far ."
Captain Wentworth made a very early return to Mr Musgrove ' s civility , and she was all but calling there in the same half hour .
Well , Frank , your dream certainly shews that Highbury is in your thoughts when you are absent .
I shall go to the piano - forte ; I have not touched it since it was tuned ."
CHAPTER IV
To those who had no resources it was a different thing ; but my resources made me quite independent .
Emma recollected , blushed , was sorry , but tried to laugh it off .
I think it is so .
She soon believed herself to penetrate Mrs . Elton ' s thoughts , and understand why she was , like herself , in happy spirits ; it was being in Miss Fairfax ' s confidence , and fancying herself acquainted with what was still a secret to other people .
How is she to - day ?
madam ," cried Emma , " if other children are at all like what I remember to have been myself , I should think five times the amount of what I have ever yet heard named as a salary on such occasions , dearly earned ."
He was then the inferior in circumstances ; he was then the poor one ; he had chambers in the Temple , and it was as much as he could do to support the appearance of a gentleman .
It was now some years since Anne had begun to learn that she and her excellent friend could sometimes think differently ; and it did not surprise her , therefore , that Lady Russell should see nothing suspicious or inconsistent , nothing to require more motives than appeared , in Mr Elliot ' s great desire of a reconciliation .
" My dear Miss Elliot !"
She instantly begged her sister would entreat Lady Middleton to take them home , as she was too miserable to stay a minute longer .
What could he mean by such horrible indelicacy ?
She never misses , I know ; and you must have seen her .
But the question is not , whether it would be a bad connexion for him , but whether he wishes it ; and I think he does .
This was handsome , and gave her more pleasure than almost anything else could have done .
You are not serious ?
What totally different feelings did Emma take back into the house from what she had brought out !-- she had then been only daring to hope for a little respite of suffering ;-- she was now in an exquisite flutter of happiness , and such happiness moreover as she believed must still be greater when the flutter should have passed away .
Charles laughed .
Will you ?
She was sitting by Mr . Knightley , and turned to him for help .
He had abundantly earned the privilege of intimate discussion of her sister ' s disappointment , by the friendly zeal with which he had endeavoured to soften it , and they always conversed with confidence .
For a few minutes she saw nothing before her ; it was all confusion .
But I could not reason so to a man in love , and was willing to trust to there being no harm in her , to her having that sort of disposition , which , in good hands , like his , might be easily led aright and turn out very well .
Marianne moved to the window --
cried Emma feelingly .
-- Which you know shewed him to be so very .
The room they were taken into was the one he chiefly occupied , and looking forwards ; behind it was another with which it immediately communicated ; the door between them was open , and Emma passed into it with the housekeeper to receive her assistance in the most comfortable manner .
Margaret , the other sister , was a good - humored , well - disposed girl ; but as she had already imbibed a good deal of Marianne ' s romance , without having much of her sense , she did not , at thirteen , bid fair to equal her sisters at a more advanced period of life .
I remember her aunt very well , Biddy Henshawe ; she married a very wealthy man .
Five hundred a year !
he told me all about it ; that Jane Fairfax and Mr . Frank Churchill are to be married , and that they have been privately engaged to one another this long while .
Upon such occasions poor Mr . Woodhouses feelings were in sad warfare .
But the men are all wild after Miss Elliot .
La !
" But that was only the effect of the suddenness of your alarm -- of the shock .
He was not only to quit his home , but to see it in the hands of others ; a trial of fortitude , which stronger heads than Sir Walter ' s have found too much .
" I think , Elinor ," she presently added , " we must employ Edward to take care of us in our return to Barton .
It was as follows :
They might all have hoped to rise by Harriet ' s acquaintance : and besides , what was the value of Harriet ' s description ?-- So easily pleased -- so little discerning ;-- what signified her praise ?
" Having understood as much , I was rather astonished to find her so very lady - like !
" Here is something quite new to me .
" I shall not attempt it .
" Pray ," said Mrs Smith , " is Mr Elliot aware of your acquaintance with me ?
" And how did you think Miss Fairfax looking ?"
how Charlotte and I did stuff the only time we were there !
" Yes , my dear , if there is time .-- But --( in a very depressed tone )-- she is coming for only one week .
The Miss Dashwoods were young , pretty , and unaffected .
He had a comfortable home for her , and Emma imagined a very sufficient income ; for though the vicarage of Highbury was not large , he was known to have some independent property ; and she thought very highly of him as a good - humoured , well - meaning , respectable young man , without any deficiency of useful understanding or knowledge of the world .
He did not mean to say that there were no pretty women , but the number of the plain was out of all proportion .
The offence which had been given her father , many years back , she knew ; Elizabeth ' s particular share in it she suspected ; and that Mr Elliot ' s idea always produced irritation in both was beyond a doubt .
Even before Miss Taylor had ceased to hold the nominal office of governess , the mildness of her temper had hardly allowed her to impose any restraint ; and the shadow of authority being now long passed away , they had been living together as friend and friend very mutually attached , and Emma doing just what she liked ; highly esteeming Miss Taylor ' s judgment , but directed chiefly by her own .
He does not care about Jane Fairfax .
Indeed , Mrs Harville and I quite agree that we love her the better for having nursed her .
He was quite as good - looking as he had appeared at Lyme , his countenance improved by speaking , and his manners were so exactly what they ought to be , so polished , so easy , so particularly agreeable , that she could compare them in excellence to only one person ' s manners .
Why they should not openly acknowledge to her mother and herself , what their constant behaviour to each other declared to have taken place , Elinor could not imagine .
If , however , by an unforeseen chance it should be in my power to serve him farther , I must think very differently of him from what I now do , if I am not as ready to be useful to him then as I sincerely wish I could be at present .
They did not always think alike .
"' Twill be a fine thing to have her married so young to be sure ," said she , " and I hear he is quite a beau , and prodigious handsome .
There she was welcomed , with the utmost delight , by her father , who had been trembling for the dangers of a solitary drive from Vicarage Lane -- turning a corner which he could never bear to think of -- and in strange hands -- a mere common coachman -- no James ; and there it seemed as if her return only were wanted to make every thing go well : for Mr . John Knightley , ashamed of his ill - humour , was now all kindness and attention ; and so particularly solicitous for the comfort of her father , as to seem -- if not quite ready to join him in a basin of gruel -- perfectly sensible of its being exceedingly wholesome ; and the day was concluding in peace and comfort to all their little party , except herself .-- But her mind had never been in such perturbation ; and it needed a very strong effort to appear attentive and cheerful till the usual hour of separating allowed her the relief of quiet reflection .
Have I explained away any part of my guilt ?"
Colonel , I do not know what you and I shall do without the Miss Dashwoods ;"-- was Mrs . Jennings ' s address to him when he first called on her , after their leaving her was settled --" for they are quite resolved upon going home from the Palmers ;-- and how forlorn we shall be , when I come back !-- Lord !
How does Mrs . Dashwood do ?
I have known a great deal of the trouble of annuities ; for my mother was clogged with the payment of three to old superannuated servants by my father ' s will , and it is amazing how disagreeable she found it .
" As to who , or what Miss Hawkins is , or how long he has been acquainted with her ," said Emma , " nothing I suppose can be known .
Was this like wishing to avoid her ?
If the errand were not a pleasure to me , it could be done , as it always is when I am not here , by my grandmama ' s ."
she was in hysterics all yesterday .
It was very desirable that Lady Russell should be no longer deceived ; and one of the concluding arrangements of this important conference , which carried them through the greater part of the morning , was , that Anne had full liberty to communicate to her friend everything relative to Mrs Smith , in which his conduct was involved .
But I believe I am nice ; I do not like strange voices ; and nobody speaks like you and poor Miss Taylor .
She knew that his mother neither behaved to him so as to make his home comfortable at present , nor to give him any assurance that he might form a home for himself , without strictly attending to her views for his aggrandizement .
He had been absent only two Sundays , and when they parted , had left her interested , even to the height of his wishes , in his prospect of soon quitting his present curacy , and obtaining that of Uppercross instead .
It seemed to him a very ill - judged measure ."
" I am sorry for that ," returned the other , while her eyes brightened at the information , " it would have gave me such pleasure to meet you there !
" I have hardly seen you since our day at Lyme .
dear , Kingston -- are you ?-- Mrs .
In speaking of the Harvilles , he seemed unable to satisfy his own sense of their kindness , especially of Mrs Harville ' s exertions as a nurse .
Later in the morning , and just as the girls were going to separate in preparation for the regular four o ' clock dinner , the hero of this inimitable charade walked in again .
with a deep sigh , that he wished I might find as much happiness in the marriage state as he had done .-- I felt that it would be of a different sort .-- Are you disposed to pity me for what I must have suffered in opening the cause to him , for my suspense while all was at stake ?-- No ; do not pity me till I reached Highbury , and saw how ill I had made her .
" No , ma ' am , for my mistress ."
Well , now I have just given you a hint of what Jane writes about , we will turn to her letter , and I am sure she tells her own story a great deal better than I can tell it for her ."
" Well -- if you advise it .-- But ( with a smile ) if Colonel Campbell should have employed a careless friend , and if it should prove to have an indifferent tone -- what shall I say ?
" No taste for drawing !"
" Yes , but I had only the credit of servilely copying such sentences as I was ashamed to put my name to .
no ; Perry shall have all the credit ."
" I am so glad to meet you ;" said Miss Steele , taking her familiarly by the arm --" for I wanted to see you of all things in the world ."
" And is Mrs . Smith your only friend ?
A likeness pleases every body ; and Miss Woodhouse ' s performances must be capital .
" Yes .
" I should not wonder ," said Mrs . Weston , " if Miss Fairfax were to have been drawn on beyond her own inclination , by her aunt ' s eagerness in accepting Mrs . Elton ' s civilities for her .
I felt that I admired you , but I told myself it was only friendship ; and till I began to make comparisons between yourself and Lucy , I did not know how far I was got .
Vigorous , decided , with sentiments to a certain point , not coarse .
Elinor took no notice of this ; and directing her attention to their visitor , endeavoured to support something like discourse with him , by talking of their present residence , its conveniences , & c . extorting from him occasional questions and remarks .
Her cheeks flushed at the name , and she felt afraid of something , though she knew not what .
" Oh !
To Anne herself it was most distressing to see Mr Elliot enter the room ; and quite painful to have him approach and speak to her .
In time , of course , Mr . Knightley would be forgotten , that is , supplanted ; but this could not be expected to happen very early .
" She was very much honoured , and should be happy in their acquaintance ."
" You did behave very shamefully .
That ' s right .
" Thank you .
I have no faith in Mrs . Elton ' s acknowledging herself the inferior in thought , word , or deed ; or in her being under any restraint beyond her own scanty rule of good - breeding .
Interference -- fruitless interference .
I can never get by this shop without stopping .
Whenever I see her , she always curtseys and asks me how I do , in a very pretty manner ; and when you have had her here to do needlework , I observe she always turns the lock of the door the right way and never bangs it .
At this moment Mr . Weston appeared at a little distance from the window , evidently on the watch .
I am much mistaken if Emma ' s doctrines give any strength of mind , or tend at all to make a girl adapt herself rationally to the varieties of her situation in life .-- They only give a little polish ."
I went in for three minutes , and was detained by Miss Bates ' s being absent .
You must be satisfied with such admiration as I can honestly give .
He was in high spirits ; as ready to talk and laugh as ever , and seemed delighted to speak of his former visit , and recur to old stories : and he was not without agitation .
It is such a happiness when good people get together -- and they always do .
There is no admiration between them , I do assure you ; and the appearances which have caught you , have arisen from some peculiar circumstances -- feelings rather of a totally different nature -- it is impossible exactly to explain :-- there is a good deal of nonsense in it -- but the part which is capable of being communicated , which is sense , is , that they are as far from any attachment or admiration for one another , as any two beings in the world can be .
He had left them completely frightened ; and Harriet eagerly clinging to him , and hardly able to speak , had just strength enough to reach Hartfield , before her spirits were quite overcome .
Chapter 23
He perfectly knew his own meaning ; and having warmly protested against her suspicion as most injurious , and slightly touched upon his respect for Miss Smith as her friend ,-- but acknowledging his wonder that Miss Smith should be mentioned at all ,-- he resumed the subject of his own passion , and was very urgent for a favourable answer .
" This is too bad ," cried Emma , as they turned away .
to look on , while repeated attentions were offering to another woman , before her face , and not resent it .-- That is a degree of placidity , which I can neither comprehend nor respect ."
" I am not yet so much changed ," cried Anne , and stopped , fearing she hardly knew what misconstruction .
There might really have been a liking formerly , though convenience and accident had drawn him a different way ; and now that he could afford to please himself , he might mean to pay his addresses to her .
Your sister being with you , my love , I have no scruple at all .
Elinor began to find this impertinence too much for her temper ; but she was saved the trouble of checking it , by Lucy ' s sharp reprimand , which now , as on many occasions , though it did not give much sweetness to the manners of one sister , was of advantage in governing those of the other .
She said nothing , therefore , till he was out of the room , but as soon as there was only Anne to hear --
" Oftentimes very convenient , no doubt , but never pleasing .
She might never have thought of him but for me ; and certainly never would have thought of him with hope , if I had not assured her of his attachment , for she is as modest and humble as I used to think him .
No one can withstand the charm of such a mystery .
She was always having a glimpse of him somewhere or other .
" A new neighbour for us all , Miss Woodhouse !"
He had no sooner been free from the horror and remorse attending the first few days of Louisa ' s accident , no sooner begun to feel himself alive again , than he had begun to feel himself , though alive , not at liberty .
The Crofts will associate with them ."
She had always wanted to do every thing , and had made more progress both in drawing and music than many might have done with so little labour as she would ever submit to .
Cruel , cruel -- nothing can acquit you .
you are acquainted with him ?"
How did you all behave ?
You had rather look out for misery for Marianne , and guilt for poor Willoughby , than an apology for the latter .
At first it was downright dulness to Emma .
" I met Mrs . Jennings in Bond Street ," said he , after the first salutation , " and she encouraged me to come on ; and I was the more easily encouraged , because I thought it probable that I might find you alone , which I was very desirous of doing .
Regard for a former servant of my own , who had since fallen into misfortune , carried me to visit him in a spunging - house , where he was confined for debt ; and there , the same house , under a similar confinement , was my unfortunate sister .
Colonel Brandon , the friend of Sir John , seemed no more adapted by resemblance of manner to be his friend , than Lady Middleton was to be his wife , or Mrs . Jennings to be Lady Middleton ' s mother .
It must not be , if by any fair interference of friendship , any representations from one who had almost a mother ' s love , and mother ' s rights , it would be prevented .
When this was told , his name distressed her no longer .
" You should have distinguished ," replied Anne .
But Marianne , not convinced , took it instantly up .
He seemed not merely happy with her , but proud .
The belief of being prudent , and self - denying , principally for his advantage , was her chief consolation , under the misery of a parting , a final parting ; and every consolation was required , for she had to encounter all the additional pain of opinions , on his side , totally unconvinced and unbending , and of his feeling himself ill used by so forced a relinquishment .
" Remember ," cried Willoughby , " from whom you received the account .
She had heard , as soon as she got back to Mrs . Goddard ' s , that Mr . Martin had been there an hour before , and finding she was not at home , nor particularly expected , had left a little parcel for her from one of his sisters , and gone away ; and on opening this parcel , she had actually found , besides the two songs which she had lent Elizabeth to copy , a letter to herself ; and this letter was from him , from Mr . Martin , and contained a direct proposal of marriage .
These valuable pictures of yours , Sir Walter , if you chose to leave them , would be perfectly safe .
" You speak as if you envied him ."
After this , he made some progress without any pause .
It was a horrid sight !-- yet when I thought of her to - day as really dying , it was a kind of comfort to me to imagine that I knew exactly how she would appear to those , who saw her last in this world .
Mrs . John Dashwood now installed herself mistress of Norland ; and her mother and sisters - in - law were degraded to the condition of visitors .
" Two or three months !"
Her three notes -- unluckily they were all in my pocketbook , or I should have denied their existence , and hoarded them for ever -- I was forced to put them up , and could not even kiss them .
" But have you not received my notes ?"
What can it be ?
It would not be a bad thing for her to be very much in love with a proper object .
Mr Elliot was attending his two cousins and Mrs Clay .
An egg boiled very soft is not unwholesome .
To my fancy , a thousand times prettier than Barton Park , where they are forced to send three miles for their meat , and have not a neighbour nearer than your mother .
She mentioned nothing of what she had heard , or what she intended , at home .
-- She did not suspect him .
" I have let my house to Admiral Croft ," would sound extremely well ; very much better than to any mere Mr --; a Mr ( save , perhaps , some half dozen in the nation ,) always needs a note of explanation .
Besides in the present case , I really thought some explanation was due to you after my making such particular inquiries about Edward ' s mother ; and I am so unfortunate , that I have not a creature whose advice I can ask .
" He has , he has ," cried Marianne , " I am sure he has .
" Not go to town !"
He was gone the next moment :-- after another moment ' s pause ,
She must learn to feel that she had been mistaken with regard to both ; that she had been unfairly influenced by appearances in each ; that because Captain Wentworth ' s manners had not suited her own ideas , she had been too quick in suspecting them to indicate a character of dangerous impetuosity ; and that because Mr Elliot ' s manners had precisely pleased her in their propriety and correctness , their general politeness and suavity , she had been too quick in receiving them as the certain result of the most correct opinions and well - regulated mind .
Their being in the back ground was a support to Anne ; she knew nothing of their looks , and felt equal to everything which she believed right to be done .
She did unfeignedly and unequivocally regret the inferiority of her own playing and singing .
In such cases my interference was giving you two bad feelings instead of one ."
Such a debasement on his !
Some portion of respect for herself , however , in spite of all these demerits -- some concern for her own appearance , and a strong sense of justice by Harriet --( there would be no need of _compassion_ to the girl who believed herself loved by Mr . Knightley -- but justice required that she should not be made unhappy by any coldness now ,) gave Emma the resolution to sit and endure farther with calmness , with even apparent kindness .-- For her own advantage indeed , it was fit that the utmost extent of Harriet ' s hopes should be enquired into ; and Harriet had done nothing to forfeit the regard and interest which had been so voluntarily formed and maintained -- or to deserve to be slighted by the person , whose counsels had never led her right .-- Rousing from reflection , therefore , and subduing her emotion , she turned to Harriet again , and , in a more inviting accent , renewed the conversation ; for as to the subject which had first introduced it , the wonderful story of Jane Fairfax , that was quite sunk and lost .-- Neither of them thought but of Mr . Knightley and themselves .
You should have consulted Perry ."
You will see them both this morning , I dare say .
I would not attempt to force the confidence of any one ; of a child much less ; because a sense of duty would prevent the denial which her wishes might direct ."
Elinor wished to talk of something else , but Lucy still pressed her to own that she had reason for her happiness ; and Elinor was obliged to go on .--
The same civilities and courtesies , the same success and satisfaction , took place on the morrow , and accompanied the whole progress of the picture , which was rapid and happy .
Your wife has a claim to your politeness , to your respect , at least .
There is great truth , however , in what you have now urged of the allowances which ought to be made for him , and it is my wish to be candid in my judgment of every body .
Had the same behaviour continued , Miss Smith might have been led into a misconception of your views ; not being aware , probably , any more than myself , of the very great inequality which you are so sensible of .
I feel that all the apologies should be on my side .
I know him well .
She had been often remiss , her conscience told her so ; remiss , perhaps , more in thought than fact ; scornful , ungracious .
Emma agreed to it , and with a blush of sensibility on Harriet ' s account , which she could not give any sincere explanation of .
" Robert Martin has no great loss -- if he can but think so ; and I hope it will not be long before he does .
" This little rectory CAN do no more than make Mr . Ferrars comfortable as a bachelor ; it cannot enable him to marry .
Miss Nash , head - teacher at Mrs . Goddard ' s , had written out at least three hundred ; and Harriet , who had taken the first hint of it from her , hoped , with Miss Woodhouse ' s help , to get a great many more .
" Her friends must all be sorry to lose her ; and will not Colonel and Mrs . Campbell be sorry to find that she has engaged herself before their return ?"
The marriage of Lieut .
She had the advantage of him in the preparation of the last few moments .
Elinor tried very seriously to convince him that there was no likelihood of her marrying Colonel Brandon ; but it was an expectation of too much pleasure to himself to be relinquished , and he was really resolved on seeking an intimacy with that gentleman , and promoting the marriage by every possible attention .
Mr Shepherd was completely empowered to act ; and no sooner had such an end been reached , than Anne , who had been a most attentive listener to the whole , left the room , to seek the comfort of cool air for her flushed cheeks ; and as she walked along a favourite grove , said , with a gentle sigh , " A few months more , and he , perhaps , may be walking here ."
" Oh !
She was actually forced to exert herself to meet Lady Russell with anything like the appearance of equal solicitude , on topics which had by nature the first claim on her .
dear , yes ," before the gentleman joined them .
He walked off in more complete self - approbation than he left for her .
The bustle and joy of such an arrival , the many to be talked to , welcomed , encouraged , and variously dispersed and disposed of , produced a noise and confusion which his nerves could not have borne under any other cause , nor have endured much longer even for this ; but the ways of Hartfield and the feelings of her father were so respected by Mrs . John Knightley , that in spite of maternal solicitude for the immediate enjoyment of her little ones , and for their having instantly all the liberty and attendance , all the eating and drinking , and sleeping and playing , which they could possibly wish for , without the smallest delay , the children were never allowed to be long a disturbance to him , either in themselves or in any restless attendance on them .
no , no "-- cried Emma , laughing as carelessly as she could -- " Upon no account in the world .
There will be very little merit in making a good wife to such a man as Mr .
Sir John never came to the Dashwoods without either inviting them to dine at the park the next day , or to drink tea with them that evening .
" You surprize me !
CHAPTER VII
Mr . Palmer took no notice of her .
He has been running after them , too , long enough , one would think , to make up his mind .
We had great amusement with those letters one morning .
The first , which was what her sister had sent him on their arrival in town , was to this effect .
It was a heartiness , and a warmth , and a sincerity which Anne delighted in the more , from the sad want of such blessings at home .
I have three unanswerable reasons for disliking Colonel Brandon ; he threatened me with rain when I wanted it to be fine ; he has found fault with the hanging of my curricle , and I cannot persuade him to buy my brown mare .
" Did you ?"
It makes one detest all one ' s acquaintance .
He had the curacy of Monkford , you know , Sir Walter , some time back , for two or three years .
" No -- nor many weeks ."
And to go home without Charles , too , without her husband !
" Now , ma ' am ," said Jane to her aunt , " shall we join Mrs .
My account states , that your sister ' s friend , the lady now staying with you , whom I have heard you mention , came to Bath with Miss Elliot and Sir Walter as long ago as September ( in short when they first came themselves ), and has been staying there ever since ; that she is a clever , insinuating , handsome woman , poor and plausible , and altogether such in situation and manner , as to give a general idea , among Sir Walter ' s acquaintance , of her meaning to be Lady Elliot , and as general a surprise that Miss Elliot should be apparently , blind to the danger ."
Herself the widow of only a knight , she gave the dignity of a baronet all its due ; and Sir Walter , independent of his claims as an old acquaintance , an attentive neighbour , an obliging landlord , the husband of her very dear friend , the father of Anne and her sisters , was , as being Sir Walter , in her apprehension , entitled to a great deal of compassion and consideration under his present difficulties .
Knowing their feelings as she did , it was a most attractive picture of happiness to her .
She had a cultivated mind , and was , generally speaking , rational and consistent ; but she had prejudices on the side of ancestry ; she had a value for rank and consequence , which blinded her a little to the faults of those who possessed them .
Lady Russell quite bores one with her new publications .
I dare say , Miss Fairfax , that he either gave his friend very minute directions , or wrote to Broadwood himself .
Mr Elliot has sense to understand the value of such a woman .
CHAPTER XII
" My brother ," whispered one of the girls ; " mamma is thinking of poor Richard ."
Absence , with the conviction probably of her indifference , had produced this very natural and very desirable effect .
He had been going to call on them .
" I was just going to tell you of our agreeable surprize in seeing him arrive this morning .
It was not thrown away on her , she bounded higher than ever , flew farther down the middle , and was in a continual course of smiles .
Poor old Mrs . Bates , civil and humble as usual , looked as if she did not quite understand what was going on .
" Pray be quick , sir ,"-- said Elinor , impatiently ;-- " I have no time to spare ."
Contrary to the usual course of things , Mr . Elton ' s wanting to pay his addresses to her had sunk him in her opinion .
" Oh , if that ' s all ," cried Miss Steele , " we can just as well go and see HER ."
Elinor wanted very much to know , though she did not chuse to ask , whether Edward was then in town ; but nothing would have induced Fanny voluntarily to mention his name before her , till able to tell her that his marriage with Miss Morton was resolved on , or till her husband ' s expectations on Colonel Brandon were answered ; because she believed them still so very much attached to each other , that they could not be too sedulously divided in word and deed on every occasion .
dear , no , never ."
I am a talker , you know ; I am rather a talker ; and now and then I have let a thing escape me which I should not .
" How !"
Mr . Weston had walked in .
The mother ' s consternation was excessive ; but it could not surpass the alarm of the Miss Steeles , and every thing was done by all three , in so critical an emergency , which affection could suggest as likely to assuage the agonies of the little sufferer .
" I shall hear about you all ," said he ; " that is my chief consolation .
I ought to have waited for official information , But now , my dear Miss Elliot , as an old friend , do give me a hint as to when I may speak .
I shall say directly , ' I wonder how you could think of such a thing ?
Captain Benwick must give up his room to them , and get another bed elsewhere ; and the whole was settled .
Put it up , put it up ; we will have a good talk about it some other time , but it will not do now .
There was no wound , no blood , no visible bruise ; but her eyes were closed , she breathed not , her face was like death .
The house was large and handsome ; and the Middletons lived in a style of equal hospitality and elegance .
I think there is a little likeness between us ."
Towards the close of it , in the interval succeeding an Italian song , she explained the words of the song to Mr Elliot .
" It was certainly never brilliant , but she would not allow it to have a sickly hue in general ; and there was a softness and delicacy in her skin which gave peculiar elegance to the character of her face ."
It was no wonder that a train of twenty young couple now walked after her to church .
But Colonel , where have you been to since we parted ?
" Depend upon it , they were all perfectly comfortable ."
She saw their sashes untied , their hair pulled about their ears , their work - bags searched , and their knives and scissors stolen away , and felt no doubt of its being a reciprocal enjoyment .
I would not recommend an egg boiled by any body else ; but you need not be afraid , they are very small , you see -- one of our small eggs will not hurt you .
The acquaintance she had already formed were unworthy of her .
_She_ would notice her ; she would improve her ; she would detach her from her bad acquaintance , and introduce her into good society ; she would form her opinions and her manners .
If he will adopt these regulations , in seven years he will be clear ; and I hope we may be able to convince him and Elizabeth , that Kellynch Hall has a respectability in itself which cannot be affected by these reductions ; and that the true dignity of Sir Walter Elliot will be very far from lessened in the eyes of sensible people , by acting like a man of principle .
Where features were indifferent , a fine complexion gave beauty to them all ; and where they were good , the effect was -- fortunately he need not attempt to describe what the effect was .
Could she but have given Harriet her feelings about it all !
But the feelings which made such composure a disgrace , left her in no danger of incurring it .
She must be allowed to be a favourer of matrimony , you know ; and ( since self will intrude ) who can say that she may not have some flying visions of attending the next Lady Elliot , through Mrs Wallis ' s recommendation ?"
" Yes , indeed , a very good letter ," replied Emma rather slowly --" so good a letter , Harriet , that every thing considered , I think one of his sisters must have helped him .
" They come straight from town , as Miss Lucy -- Mrs . Ferrars told me ."
" I do suspect that in the midst of your perplexities at that time , you had very great amusement in tricking us all .-- I am sure you had .-- I am sure it was a consolation to you ."
She always watched them as long as she could , delighted to fancy she understood what they might be talking of , as they walked along in happy independence , or equally delighted to see the Admiral ' s hearty shake of the hand when he encountered an old friend , and observe their eagerness of conversation when occasionally forming into a little knot of the navy , Mrs Croft looking as intelligent and keen as any of the officers around her .
At her age she can have no experience , and with her little wit , is not very likely ever to have any that can avail her .
" Oh , la !
Man is more robust than woman , but he is not longer lived ; which exactly explains my view of the nature of their attachments .
All her impatience to be at home again now returned ; her mother was dearer to her than ever ; dearer through the very excess of her mistaken confidence in Willoughby , and she was wildly urgent to be gone .
" You should have gone to Cromer , my dear , if you went anywhere .-- Perry was a week at Cromer once , and he holds it to be the best of all the sea - bathing places .
" John is in such spirits today !"
" What is to be done , my dear Emma ?-- what is to be done ?"
However , you will think of all that at your leisure ."
His sister married my tenant in Somersetshire , the Croft , who rents Kellynch ."
It would be dreadful to be standing so close !
cried Lucy , who generally made an amendment to all her sister ' s assertions .
( looking round with the most good - humoured dependence on every body ' s assent )-- Do not you all think I shall ?"
Gilbert ."
She knows nothing herself , and looks upon Emma as knowing every thing .
His estate had been rated by Sir John at about six or seven hundred a year ; but he lived at an expense to which that income could hardly be equal , and he had himself often complained of his poverty .
To your fine mind , I well know the sight of beauty is a real gratification ."
and to arrive with some degree of hope ?
If he should ever be made a baronet !
They praised the morning ; gloried in the sea ; sympathized in the delight of the fresh - feeling breeze -- and were silent ; till Henrietta suddenly began again with --
Mrs . Elton was first seen at church : but though devotion might be interrupted , curiosity could not be satisfied by a bride in a pew , and it must be left for the visits in form which were then to be paid , to settle whether she were very pretty indeed , or only rather pretty , or not pretty at all .
" What is this ?"
She cared not for Mrs Clay , and had nothing to blush for in the public manners of her father and sister .
They will stay a good while when they do come , and he will be half his time with us .
At last he was persuaded to move on from the front of the Crown ; and being now almost facing the house where the Bateses lodged , Emma recollected his intended visit the day before , and asked him if he had paid it .
But she soon saw how likely it was that Lucy , in her self - provident care , in her haste to secure him , should overlook every thing but the risk of delay .
I admire all that quaint , old - fashioned politeness ; it is much more to my taste than modern ease ; modern ease often disgusts me .
He told me it was to be a great secret ; and , therefore , I should not think of mentioning it to any body but you , but he said you knew it ."
But that would be all over now .-- Poor fellow !-- No more exploring parties to Donwell made for _her_ .
Those who are standing by are usually thinking of something very different ."
The Admiral , after taking two or three refreshing turns about the room with his hands behind him , being called to order by his wife , now came up to Captain Wentworth , and without any observation of what he might be interrupting , thinking only of his own thoughts , began with --
And how suffer him to leave her without saying one word of gratitude , of concurrence , of common kindness !
While they talked , they were advancing towards the carriage ; it was ready ; and , before she could speak again , he had handed her in .
" Mrs . Robert Ferrars !"
Weston ."
It was a remainder of former sentiment ; it was an impulse of pure , though unacknowledged friendship ; it was a proof of his own warm and amiable heart , which she could not contemplate without emotions so compounded of pleasure and pain , that she knew not which prevailed .
reciprocal compliments , which would have been esteemed about equal .
A man must pay for his convenience ; and it HAS cost me a vast deal of money ."
It is a very cold afternoon -- but in this carriage we know nothing of the matter .-- Ha !
Mrs . Ferrars looked exceedingly angry , and drawing herself up more stiffly than ever , pronounced in retort this bitter philippic , " Miss Morton is Lord Morton ' s daughter ."
I should not go , you may be sure , if I did not feel quite at ease about my dear child ."
Remember me kindly to her .
" Yes ," said he , " very true ; here we separate , but Harville and I shall soon be after you ; that is , Harville , if you are ready , I am in half a minute .
She could not flatter herself with any idea of blindness in his attachment to _her_ .
You must know best what will be its effect ; but had I not seriously , and from my heart believed it might be of service , might lessen her regrets , I would not have suffered myself to trouble you with this account of my family afflictions , with a recital which may seem to have been intended to raise myself at the expense of others ."
" And has it indeed been spoken of ?"
On the subject of the first of the two circumstances , she did , after a little reflection , venture the following question .
" Oh !
I am sure you hear nothing but good of him from Colonel Wallis ; and who can know him better than Colonel Wallis ?"
Oh !
They then proceeded a few paces in silence .
Would they only have gone away , and left her in the quiet possession of that room it would have been her cure ; but to have them all standing or waiting around her was distracting , and in desperation , she said she would go home .
In no other light could you have been more to me than a common acquaintance .
There are secrets in all families , you know )-- The case is , that a party of friends are invited to pay a visit at Enscombe in January ; and that Frank ' s coming depends upon their being put off .
Poor girl !
That would be enough for us to marry upon , and we might trust to time and chance for the rest ."
Emma was delighted , and only wanted him to go on in the same style ; but his mind was the next moment in his own concerns and with his own Jane , and his next words were ,
I wonder how she speaks of the Coles -- what she calls them !
A large party secures its own amusement .
Heaven forbid !
My regard for Hartfield is most warm "--
--
my dear , it is not like Hartfield .
Your views for Harriet are best known to yourself ; but as you make no secret of your love of match - making , it is fair to suppose that views , and plans , and projects you have ;-- and as a friend I shall just hint to you that if Elton is the man , I think it will be all labour in vain ."
If he were , he would have done this differently .
It did appear -- there was no concealing it -- exactly like the pretence of being in love with her , instead of Harriet ; an inconstancy , if real , the most contemptible and abominable !
Knightley .-- They had determined that their marriage ought to be concluded while John and Isabella were still at Hartfield , to allow them the fortnight ' s absence in a tour to the seaside , which was the plan .-- John and Isabella , and every other friend , were agreed in approving it .
Richard ?-- I saw you the other day as you rode through the town -- Mrs . Otway , I protest !-- and good Mr . Otway , and Miss Otway and Miss Caroline .-- Such a host of friends !-- and Mr . George and Mr .
Am I to believe that you have never sought to recommend yourself particularly to Miss Smith ?-- that you have never thought seriously of her ?"
is this just ?
" They mean no less to be civil and kind to us now ," said Elinor , " by these frequent invitations , than by those which we received from them a few weeks ago .
The horses arrived , even before they were expected , and Colonel Brandon only pressing her hand with a look of solemnity , and a few words spoken too low to reach her ear , hurried into the carriage .
His visit he would now defer ; but they had a very interesting parley about what could be done and should be done .
" Indeed , I do say it .
" You certainly will meet them if I can prevail ; and I shall call on Miss Bates in my way home ."
The compliments of his neighbours were over ; he was no longer teased by being wished joy of so sorrowful an event ; and the wedding - cake , which had been a great distress to him , was all eat up .
It was with the daughter of Mr Shepherd , who had returned , after an unprosperous marriage , to her father ' s house , with the additional burden of two children .
She had talked her into love ; but , alas !
` Nobody was ever so fortunate as herself !'
Where was this superfine , extraordinary sort of gallantry of yours then ?"
Emma was most agreeably surprized .-- Mr .
If one could ascertain what the chief of them -- the Coles , for instance .
Such confidence , powerful in its own warmth , and bewitching in the wit which often expressed it , must have been enough for Anne ; but Lady Russell saw it very differently .
But there are many works well worth reading at the Park ; and there are others of more modern production which I know I can borrow of Colonel Brandon .
As an old friend , you will allow me to hope , Miss Fairfax , that ten years hence you may have as many concentrated objects as I have ."
Dear me !
" You need not be at any pains to reconcile me to the match .
If you value her conduct or happiness , infuse as much of your own spirit into her as you can .
They would soon , she supposed , be settled at Delaford .-- Delaford ,-- that place in which so much conspired to give her an interest ; which she wished to be acquainted with , and yet desired to avoid .
" I believe you are right , my love ; it will be better that there should by no annuity in the case ; whatever I may give them occasionally will be of far greater assistance than a yearly allowance , because they would only enlarge their style of living if they felt sure of a larger income , and would not be sixpence the richer for it at the end of the year .
The wretchedness of a scheme to Box Hill was in Emma ' s thoughts all the evening .
And away she went ; but returning again in a moment ,
His enquiries , however , produced at length an account of the scene she had been engaged in there , soon after his leaving the place .
It was spoken with enthusiasm .
If I were to marry , I must expect to repent it ."
It may be proper to conceal their engagement ( if they ARE engaged ) from Mrs . Smith -- and if that is the case , it must be highly expedient for Willoughby to be but little in Devonshire at present .
The Parrys and Sandersons luckily are coming tonight you know , and that will amuse her ."
She will grow just refined enough to be uncomfortable with those among whom birth and circumstances have placed her home .
He may live twenty years longer .
A very fine woman with a large fortune , in love with him !
And , as to procuring a dispensation , there could be no difficulty at his time of life , and with his character .
You will see her to advantage ; see her and hear her -- no , I am afraid you will not hear her at all , for she has an aunt who never holds her tongue ."
" To London !-- and are you going this morning ?"
Elinor was much more hurt by Marianne ' s warmth than she had been by what produced it ; but Colonel Brandon ' s eyes , as they were fixed on Marianne , declared that he noticed only what was amiable in it , the affectionate heart which could not bear to see a sister slighted in the smallest point .
It is such enjoyment to them , that if their uncle did not lay down the rule of their taking turns , whichever began would never give way to the other ."
No , it was too unkind .
" I know how highly you think of Jane Fairfax ," said Emma .
-- And he repeated her words with such assurance of accent , such boastful pretence of amazement , that she could not help replying with quickness ,
It was not forced on you .
He was nice in his eating , uncertain in his hours ; fond of his child , though affecting to slight it ; and idled away the mornings at billiards , which ought to have been devoted to business .
without partiality ; but Mrs Charles knows no more how they should be treated --!
" Yes , Marianne , but I would not go while Mrs . Smith was there , and with no other companion than Mr .
Anne Elliot , with all her claims of birth , beauty , and mind , to throw herself away at nineteen ; involve herself at nineteen in an engagement with a young man , who had nothing but himself to recommend him , and no hopes of attaining affluence , but in the chances of a most uncertain profession , and no connexions to secure even his farther rise in the profession , would be , indeed , a throwing away , which she grieved to think of !
had she never brought Harriet forward !
Has Emma read it all ?
Captain Wentworth now hurried off to get everything ready on his part , and to be soon followed by the two ladies .
That is a great thing .
She had never been admitted before to be seriously ill .
She caught it instantaneously ; and recovering her courage with the feeling of safety , soon added , more composedly , " Are you acquainted with Mr Elliot ?"
" That is very true ," replied her mother , " but of her society , separately from that of other people , you will scarcely have any thing at all , and you will almost always appear in public with Lady Middleton ."
Let my father ' s servant go with you .-- Let me order the carriage .
" Don ' t say I was cross .
" And now that I understand your question , I must pronounce it to be a very unfair one .
Edward was not entirely without hopes of some favourable change in his mother towards him ; and on THAT he rested for the residue of their income .
" Ah !
He was silent .
Edward Ferrars was not recommended to their good opinion by any peculiar graces of person or address .
But just got acquainted with Mrs . Weston , and others !-- I hate the recollection ."
I am not sorry , indeed , to make it over to another .
He was quite delighted .
They were married , married in town , and now hastening down to her uncle ' s .
Lord Byron ' s " dark blue seas " could not fail of being brought forward by their present view , and she gladly gave him all her attention as long as attention was possible .
Keep your raptures for Harriet ' s face .
I could never hope to equal my own doings at Randalls .
" If this open weather holds much longer ," said Mrs . Jennings , when they met at breakfast the following morning , " Sir John will not like leaving Barton next week ; ' tis a sad thing for sportsmen to lose a day ' s pleasure .
" She was determined to drop his acquaintance immediately , and she was very thankful that she had never been acquainted with him at all .
He had just dismounted ;-- she could not be mistaken ,-- it WAS Edward .
But still she had inclination enough for shewing people again how delightfully Mr . Frank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse danced -- for doing that in which she need not blush to compare herself with Jane Fairfax -- and even for simple dancing itself , without any of the wicked aids of vanity -- to assist him first in pacing out the room they were in to see what it could be made to hold -- and then in taking the dimensions of the other parlour , in the hope of discovering , in spite of all that Mr . Weston could say of their exactly equal size , that it was a little the largest .
We must consider what Miss Fairfax quits , before we condemn her taste for what she goes to ."
I am sure you will agree with me ."
It was very well known that no affection was ever supposed to exist between the children of any man by different marriages ; and why was he to ruin himself , and their poor little Harry , by giving away all his money to his half sisters ?
Without knowing when the carriage turned into Vicarage Lane , or when it stopped , they found themselves , all at once , at the door of his house ; and he was out before another syllable passed .-- Emma then felt it indispensable to wish him a good night .
" They will be brought up ," said he , in a serious accent , " to be as unlike myself as is possible .
You said you had a great many , and now you have not one left .
Could a linguist , could a grammarian , could even a mathematician have seen what she did , have witnessed their appearance together , and heard their history of it , without feeling that circumstances had been at work to make them peculiarly interesting to each other ?-- How much more must an imaginist , like herself , be on fire with speculation and foresight !-- especially with such a groundwork of anticipation as her mind had already made .
Mr . Elton looked as if he did not very well know what answer to make ; which was exactly the case ; for though very much gratified by the kind care of such a fair lady , and not liking to resist any advice of her ' s , he had not really the least inclination to give up the visit ;-- but Emma , too eager and busy in her own previous conceptions and views to hear him impartially , or see him with clear vision , was very well satisfied with his muttering acknowledgment of its being " very cold , certainly very cold ," and walked on , rejoicing in having extricated him from Randalls , and secured him the power of sending to inquire after Harriet every hour of the evening .
It implies everything amiable .
This is a recollection which ought to make me forgive every one sooner than myself .
Knightley immediately got up , and in a manner decidedly graver than usual , said ,
While they were speaking , a whispering between her father and Elizabeth caught her ear .
repeated Mrs . Elton .
The morning was fine and dry , and Marianne , in her plan of employment abroad , had not calculated for any change of weather during their stay at Cleveland .
Elinor could no longer witness this torrent of unresisted grief in silence .
We are both prejudiced ; you against , I for him ; and we have no chance of agreeing till he is really here ."
I never can be blameless .
Let us forgive each other at once .
" Had he been only in a violent fever , you would not have despised him half so much .
Among the rest there was one for Colonel Brandon ;-- he took it , looked at the direction , changed colour , and immediately left the room .
She received the news with resolute composure ; made no observation on it , and at first shed no tears ; but after a short time they would burst out , and for the rest of the day , she was in a state hardly less pitiable than when she first learnt to expect the event .
Sixty - five miles farther than from Maple Grove to London .
She must talk to Lady Russell , tell her , consult with her , and having done her best , wait the event with as much composure as possible ; and after all , her greatest want of composure would be in that quarter of the mind which could not be opened to Lady Russell ; in that flow of anxieties and fears which must be all to herself .
I believe Mrs Charles is not quite pleased with my not inviting them oftener ; but you know it is very bad to have children with one that one is obligated to be checking every moment ; " don ' t do this ," and " don ' t do that ;" or that one can only keep in tolerable order by more cake than is good for them ."
Knightley ."
It was a right thing to do .
and as she could not even wish him successful , she heartily wished him indifferent .
" Nothing very bad .-- The fate of thousands .
Its probability and its eligibility have really so equalled each other !
Miss Woodhouse was so great a personage in Highbury , that the prospect of the introduction had given as much panic as pleasure ; but the humble , grateful little girl went off with highly gratified feelings , delighted with the affability with which Miss Woodhouse had treated her all the evening , and actually shaken hands with her at last !
It is the fault of her face that she has them not ."
Anne could not help laughing .
This is what we all feel .
" How odd you are !
Miss Woodhouse , how you do forget !"
I can much more readily enter into the temptation of getting away from Miss Bates , than I can believe in the triumph of Miss Fairfax ' s mind over Mrs . Elton .
" No , sir ," replied his son , laughing , " I seem to have had it from nobody .-- Very odd !-- I really was persuaded of Mrs . Weston ' s having mentioned it in one of her letters to Enscombe , many weeks ago , with all these particulars -- but as she declares she never heard a syllable of it before , of course it must have been a dream .
Anne was now at hand to take up her own cause , and the sincerity of her manner being soon sufficient to convince him , where conviction was at least very agreeable , he had no farther scruples as to her being left to dine alone , though he still wanted her to join them in the evening , when the child might be at rest for the night , and kindly urged her to let him come and fetch her , but she was quite unpersuadable ; and this being the case , she had ere long the pleasure of seeing them set off together in high spirits .
cried Mary , her eyes brightening .
You must think wretchedly indeed of Willoughby , if , after all that has openly passed between them , you can doubt the nature of the terms on which they are together .
" Much nearer thirty ," said her husband .
These kind of things are very well at Christmas , when one is sitting round the fire ; but quite out of place , in my opinion , when one is exploring about the country in summer .
" Now I have done ," cried Captain Wentworth .
" You are comfortable because you are under command ."
My right to place myself in a situation requiring such concealment , is another question .
she was as grateful as possible , you may be sure .
I assure you , Mr Elliot had not the share which you have been supposing , in whatever pleasure the concert of last night might afford : not Mr Elliot ; it is not Mr Elliot that --"
His ostensible reason , however , was to ask whether Mr . Woodhouse ' s party could be made up in the evening without him , or whether he should be in the smallest degree necessary at Hartfield .
It was not unlikely , she thought , that she might see Mr . Knightley in her way ; or , perhaps , he might come in while she were paying her visit .
The something might be guessed by its effects .
" Well , and that is as early as most men can afford to marry , who are not born to an independence .
In the way of love , I am sure he does not .
" I flatter myself ," replied Elinor , " that even under the disadvantage of better rooms and a broader staircase , you will hereafter find your own house as faultless as you now do this ."
It was our darling wish that you might be attached to each other -- and we were persuaded that it was so .-- Imagine what we have been feeling on your account ."
Nothing could replace him , therefore , in her former esteem , nor injure the interests of Colonel Brandon .
Jane was forced to smile completely , for a moment ; and the smile partly remained as she turned towards him , and said in a conscious , low , yet steady voice ,
Precious as was the company of her daughter to her , she desired nothing so much as to give up its constant enjoyment to her valued friend ; and to see Marianne settled at the mansion - house was equally the wish of Edward and Elinor .
I can imagine , that before she had seen any body superior , she might tolerate him .
His good friend Perry , too , whom he had spoken to on the subject , did not at present recollect any thing of the riddle kind ; but he had desired Perry to be upon the watch , and as he went about so much , something , he thought , might come from that quarter .
She is not a clever girl , but she has better sense than you are aware of , and does not deserve to have her understanding spoken of so slightingly .
But by an appeal to her affection for her mother , by representing the inconveniences which that indulgent mother must draw on herself , if ( as would probably be the case ) she consented to this increase of establishment , Marianne was shortly subdued ; and she promised not to tempt her mother to such imprudent kindness by mentioning the offer , and to tell Willoughby when she saw him next , that it must be declined .
What felt Elinor at that moment ?
Emma watched and decided , that with such feelings as were now shewn , it could not be fairly supposed that he had been ever voluntarily absenting himself ; that he had not been acting a part , or making a parade of insincere professions ; and that Mr . Knightley certainly had not done him justice .
They would be very much pleased ."
" Upon my word ," replied Elinor , " I cannot tell you , for I do not perfectly comprehend the meaning of the word .
" _He_ is undoubtedly very much in love -- every thing denotes it -- very much in love indeed !-- and when he comes again , if his affection continue , I must be on my guard not to encourage it .-- It would be most inexcusable to do otherwise , as my own mind is quite made up .
" The lady then -- Miss Grey I think you called her -- is very rich ?"
An ancient family to be so driven away !
That is _court_ .
So then he was monstrous happy , and talked on some time about what they should do , and they agreed he should take orders directly , and they must wait to be married till he got a living .
After waiting another moment --
She could not endure that such a friendship as theirs should be severed unfairly .
He joined them ; but , as if irresolute whether to join or to pass on , said nothing , only looked .
Oh !
Then she is no rule for Mrs . Churchill , who is as thorough a fine lady as any body ever beheld ."
Mrs . Jennings was delighted with her gratitude , and only wondered that after hearing such a sentence , the Colonel should be able to take leave of them , as he immediately did , with the utmost sang - froid , and go away without making her any reply !-- She had not thought her old friend could have made so indifferent a suitor .
" Certainly ."
" This ," said she , " is nearly the sense , or rather the meaning of the words , for certainly the sense of an Italian love - song must not be talked of , but it is as nearly the meaning as I can give ; for I do not pretend to understand the language .
" But why should you be sorry , sir ?-- I assure you , it did the children a great deal of good ."
The tone , the look , with which " Thank God !"
" I do not know what I told her ," he replied , impatiently ; " less than was due to the past , beyond a doubt , and in all likelihood much more than was justified by the future .
Give me the paper and listen .
" Our amiable young man is a very weak young man , if this be the first occasion of his carrying through a resolution to do right against the will of others .
" But you must go , Charles .
" Your promise makes me easy .
" Come , come ," cried Emma , feeling this to be an unsafe subject , " I must beg you not to talk of the sea .
I like them all ."
Mrs Clay was very pleasant , and very smiling , but her courtesies and smiles were more a matter of course .
Such language for a young man entirely dependent , to use !-- Nobody but you , Mr . Knightley , would imagine it possible .
The Wallises , she had amusement in understanding them .
" My own loss is great ," be continued , " in being obliged to leave so agreeable a party ; but I am the more concerned , as I fear my presence is necessary to gain your admittance at Whitwell ."
He wanted her to look up and smile ; and having now brought herself not to smile too broadly -- she did -- cheerfully answering ,
Worse and worse .
The contrivances of modern days indeed have rendered a gentleman ' s carriage perfectly complete .
" I should have been quite disappointed if I had not found you here STILL ," said she repeatedly , with a strong emphasis on the word .
June will soon be here ."
" Disappointment ?"
Her flattery had already subdued the pride of Lady Middleton , and made an entry into the close heart of Mrs . John Dashwood ; and these were effects that laid open the probability of greater .
A few minutes more spent in the same kind of effusion , concluded his visit ; and with repeated assurances to his sisters that he really believed there was no material danger in Fanny ' s indisposition , and that they need not therefore be very uneasy about it , he went away ; leaving the three ladies unanimous in their sentiments on the present occasion , as far at least as it regarded Mrs . Ferrars ' s conduct , the Dashwoods ', and Edward ' s .
" It is too much a matter of fact , but here it is .-- What two letters of the alphabet are there , that express perfection ?"
" Of his sense and his goodness ," continued Elinor , " no one can , I think , be in doubt , who has seen him often enough to engage him in unreserved conversation .
I knew he would !"
" And that will tempt YOU , Miss Marianne ."
It is not that I did not think of it , or desire it , as what could alone crown all my other success ; but I was proud , too proud to ask again .
She gave him a brief reply .
Marianne was still handsomer .
He came with Mrs . Weston , to whom and to Highbury he seemed to take very cordially .
Mr . Weston ' s ball was to be a real thing .
" His father ' s marriage ," he said , " had been the wisest measure , every friend must rejoice in it ; and the family from whom he had received such a blessing must be ever considered as having conferred the highest obligation on him ."
Something of a very unpleasant nature , I find , has occurred ;-- do let me know directly what it is .
Charlotte is very pretty , I can tell you .
Nothing can be more simple , you see .
The evening came , the drawing - rooms were lighted up , the company assembled .
Mrs . Dashwood had been informed by her husband of the solemn promise on the part of his son in their favour , which gave comfort to his last earthly reflections .
" Oh !
The father and mother were in the old English style , and the young people in the new .
Under a bright mid - day sun , at almost Midsummer , Mr . Woodhouse was safely conveyed in his carriage , with one window down , to partake of this al - fresco party ; and in one of the most comfortable rooms in the Abbey , especially prepared for him by a fire all the morning , he was happily placed , quite at his ease , ready to talk with pleasure of what had been achieved , and advise every body to come and sit down , and not to heat themselves .-- Mrs . Weston , who seemed to have walked there on purpose to be tired , and sit all the time with him , remained , when all the others were invited or persuaded out , his patient listener and sympathiser .
I have a very sincere interest in Emma .
She was lost , and when she had scolded back her senses , she found the others still waiting for the carriage , and Mr Elliot ( always obliging ) just setting off for Union Street on a commission of Mrs Clay ' s .
Every thing was to take its natural course , however , neither impelled nor assisted .
repeated Edward --" but why must you have hunters ?
Now , it so happened that in spite of Emma ' s resolution of never marrying , there was something in the name , in the idea of Mr . Frank Churchill , which always interested her .
She left her seat , she would go ; one half of her should not be always so much wiser than the other half , or always suspecting the other of being worse than it was .
I do not like having such things so long in hand .
A very few minutes more , however , completed the present trial .
" So prettily done !
When Lady Russell not long afterwards , was entering Bath on a wet afternoon , and driving through the long course of streets from the Old Bridge to Camden Place , amidst the dash of other carriages , the heavy rumble of carts and drays , the bawling of newspapermen , muffin - men and milkmen , and the ceaseless clink of pattens , she made no complaint .
She has cousins here , you know , and many acquaintance , which would make it cheerful for her , and I am sure she would be glad to get to a place where she could have medical attendance at hand , in case of his having another seizure .
Upon the whole , she was very persuadable ; and it being briefly settled among themselves how it might be done without neglecting his comfort -- how certainly Mrs . Goddard , if not Mrs . Bates , might be depended on for bearing him company -- Mr . Woodhouse was to be talked into an acquiescence of his daughter ' s going out to dinner on a day now near at hand , and spending the whole evening away from him .
Emma heard that Frank wrote in the highest spirits of this arrangement , and seemed most fully to appreciate the blessing of having two months before him of such near neighbourhood to many dear friends -- for the house was taken for May and June .
CHAPTER XVIII
How else could they come ?"
There were moments in abundance , when , if not by the absence of her mother and sisters , at least by the nature of their employments , conversation was forbidden among them , and every effect of solitude was produced .
Poor dear , it seems quite cruel to let her be alone .
no , it is a meeting at the Crown , a regular meeting .
Papa is only speaking his own regret ."
Jane had spent an evening at Hartfield with her grandmother and aunt , and every thing was relapsing much into its usual state .
" Never mind if they do .
And what is her attraction ?
" Perhaps it is as well ," said Frank Churchill , as he attended Emma to her carriage .
" Well , go on ."
Frederick Wentworth had used such words , or something like them , but without an idea that they would be carried round to her .
Why does he make it any business of his , to wonder at what I do ?-- at my taking my family to one part of the coast or another ?-- I may be allowed , I hope , the use of my judgment as well as Mr .
" We consider our Hartfield pork ," replied Mr . Woodhouse --" indeed it certainly is , so very superior to all other pork , that Emma and I cannot have a greater pleasure than --"
" Oh !"
Everybody has their taste in noises as well as in other matters ; and sounds are quite innoxious , or most distressing , by their sort rather than their quantity .
He then really thought himself equal to it .
Every emendation of Anne ' s had been on the side of honesty against importance .
The circumstances of his marriage , too , were found to admit of much extenuation .
They were brought together by mutual affection , with the warmest approbation of their real friends ; their intimate knowledge of each other seemed to make their happiness certain -- and they only wanted something to live upon .
He found too late , in short , that he had entangled himself ; and that precisely as he became fully satisfied of his not caring for Louisa at all , he must regard himself as bound to her , if her sentiments for him were what the Harvilles supposed .
He was released without any reproach to himself , from an entanglement which had long formed his misery , from a woman whom he had long ceased to love ;-- and elevated at once to that security with another , which he must have thought of almost with despair , as soon as he had learnt to consider it with desire .
" Mr . Knightley ," said Emma , trying to be lively , but really confused -- " I am in a very extraordinary situation .
To take a dislike to a young man , only because he appeared to be of a different disposition from himself , was unworthy the real liberality of mind which she was always used to acknowledge in him ; for with all the high opinion of himself , which she had often laid to his charge , she had never before for a moment supposed it could make him unjust to the merit of another .
My poor mother was half frantic ."
Emma soon saw that her companion was not in the happiest humour .
I think my father certainly ought to hear of it ; do mention all about him ."
said Elinor , unable to be longer silent .
Sophy cannot bear them .
-- But , said I , I shall be more sure of succeeding if one of you will go with me .--` Oh ,' said he , ` wait half a minute , till I have finished my job ;'-- For , would you believe it , Miss Woodhouse , there he is , in the most obliging manner in the world , fastening in the rivet of my mother ' s spectacles .-- The rivet came out , you know , this morning .-- So very obliging !-- For my mother had no use of her spectacles -- could not put them on .
Instead of pushing his fortune in the line marked out for the heir of the house of Elliot , he had purchased independence by uniting himself to a rich woman of inferior birth .
Her father never went beyond the shrubbery , where two divisions of the ground sufficed him for his long walk , or his short , as the year varied ; and since Mrs . Weston ' s marriage her exercise had been too much confined .
Elinor derived no comfortable feelings from this conversation , to lessen the uneasiness of her mind on other points ; she was left , on the contrary , with a melancholy impression of Colonel Brandon ' s unhappiness , and was prevented even from wishing it removed , by her anxiety for the very event that must confirm it .
But this was the only point of relief .
Mrs . Elton eagerly interposed with ,
" Yes ," said Jane , " we heard his kind offers , we heard every thing ."
" I have still the advantage of you by sixteen years ' experience , and by not being a pretty young woman and a spoiled child .
" Old Lady Mary Maclean ?
Fortunately , however , it did cease .
This was the knowledge of herself , on the first question of inquiry , which she reached ; and without being long in reaching it .-- She was most sorrowfully indignant ; ashamed of every sensation but the one revealed to her -- her affection for Mr .
We all like a play .
He was wishing to confide in her -- perhaps to consult her ;-- cost her what it would , she would listen .
They had Mr Elliot too .
" I either depend more upon Emma ' s good sense than you do , or am more anxious for her present comfort ; for I cannot lament the acquaintance .
said Marianne , as soon as they were gone .
Elton !--` Jane Fairfax and Jane Fairfax .'
In the height of her morality , good woman !
He must think himself a most agreeable fellow ; I could not do such a thing .
The next day produced little or no alteration in the state of the patient ; she certainly was not better , and , except that there was no amendment , did not appear worse .
" You did then ," said Elinor , a little softened , " believe yourself at one time attached to her ?"
Her knowledge of her father and Elizabeth inclined her to think that the sacrifice of one pair of horses would be hardly less painful than of both , and so on , through the whole list of Lady Russell ' s too gentle reductions .
Elinor ' s thoughts were full of what might be passing in Berkeley Street during their absence ; but a moment ' s glance at her sister when they returned was enough to inform her , that Willoughby had paid no second visit there .
Isabella turned to Mrs . Weston for her approbation of the plan .
-- And to this day , I do believe , she knows not whether it was his present or his daughter ' s ."
I assure you I am not at all pleased .
Her sister , though comparatively but little removed by matrimony , being settled in London , only sixteen miles off , was much beyond her daily reach ; and many a long October and November evening must be struggled through at Hartfield , before Christmas brought the next visit from Isabella and her husband , and their little children , to fill the house , and give her pleasant society again .
Emma guessed him to be the drudge of some attorney , and too stupid to rise .
No comparison .
Louisa had once opened her eyes , but soon closed them again , without apparent consciousness .
Mrs . Dashwood WOULD sit up with her all night ; and Elinor , in compliance with her mother ' s entreaty , went to bed .
_She_ could not .
After laying out for some compliments of being deeply regretted in their old neighbourhood , which Anne could not pay , they had only a few faint enquiries to make , before the talk must be all their own .
The style of the letter was much above her expectation .
It will not be so great a loss of time : but if you dislike it --"
A new sort of way this , for a young fellow to be making love , by breaking his mistress ' s head , is not it , Miss Elliot ?
It was quite a chance , he said , that he had not gone round by Randalls .
You may guess , after all these expenses , how very far we must be from being rich , and how acceptable Mrs . Ferrars ' s kindness is ."
She was quite concerned and ashamed , and resolved to do such things no more .
Their love of society , and their new dining - room , prepared every body for their keeping dinner - company ; and a few parties , chiefly among the single men , had already taken place .
" One should be sorry to see greater pride or refinement in the teacher of a school , Harriet .
Edward had two thousand pounds , and Elinor one , which , with Delaford living , was all that they could call their own ; for it was impossible that Mrs . Dashwood should advance anything ; and they were neither of them quite enough in love to think that three hundred and fifty pounds a - year would supply them with the comforts of life .
She will feel her own sufferings to be nothing .
A young lady who faints , must be recovered ; questions must be answered , and surprizes be explained .
Within the first five minutes I said , ` I will be at Bath on Wednesday ,' and I was .
So I looked at it directly , and , ' Lord !
" How is it possible ?"
At last Emma attacked her on another ground .
" Is this the real reason of your coming ?"
" What did Mr . Weston tell you ?"
I have no objections at all to meeting the Hartfield family .
I have observed , Mrs . Elton , in the course of my life , that if things are going untowardly one month , they are sure to mend the next ."
The dews of a summer evening are what I would not expose any body to .
You know nothing of drawing .
On ascending the stairs , the Miss Dashwoods found so many people before them in the room , that there was not a person at liberty to tend to their orders ; and they were obliged to wait .
Now , here will be Mr . Elton and Miss Hawkins ; and there are the Coles , such very good people ; and the Perrys -- I suppose there never was a happier or a better couple than Mr . and Mrs . Perry .
As to any thing superior for you , I suppose she is quite in the dark .
How can Emma imagine she has any thing to learn herself , while Harriet is presenting such a delightful inferiority ?
A circumstance to interest her .
their luxury and ease .
" Not a walk in the rain , I should imagine ."
But all this may be explained by such a situation of his affairs as you have supposed .
One thing only was wanting to make the prospect of the ball completely satisfactory to Emma -- its being fixed for a day within the granted term of Frank Churchill ' s stay in Surry ; for , in spite of Mr . Weston ' s confidence , she could not think it so very impossible that the Churchills might not allow their nephew to remain a day beyond his fortnight .
You will excuse me .
The disproportion in their fortune was nothing ; it did not give her a moment ' s regret ; but to have no family to receive and estimate him properly , nothing of respectability , of harmony , of good will to offer in return for all the worth and all the prompt welcome which met her in his brothers and sisters , was a source of as lively pain as her mind could well be sensible of under circumstances of otherwise strong felicity .
" To be sure ," said she , " it is better than parting with fifteen hundred pounds at once .
" I wish we could contrive it ," said she ; " but I cannot think of any tolerable pretence for going in ;-- no servant that I want to inquire about of his housekeeper -- no message from my father ."
She could now look forward to giving him that full and perfect confidence which her disposition was most ready to welcome as a duty .
Upon my word , Miss Anne Elliot , you have the most extraordinary taste !
And now I come to the principal , the only important part of my conduct while belonging to you , which excites my own anxiety , or requires very solicitous explanation .
" Yes -- rather -- I have been thinking of it some little time ."
" Oh , my dear Miss Dashwood ," said Mrs . Palmer soon afterwards , " I have got such a favour to ask of you and your sister .
Chuse your own degree of crossness .
Ferrars ?"
She merely said , in the course of some trivial chat , " Well , Harriet , whenever you marry I would advise you to do so and so "-- and thought no more of it , till after a minute ' s silence she heard Harriet say in a very serious tone , " I shall never marry ."
She calls you , Knightley -- what can she do for Mr . Cole ?
" Never , never !"
of Uppercross , in the county of Somerset ," and by inserting most accurately the day of the month on which he had lost his wife .
The woods and walks thickly covered with dead leaves ."
Even then , I was not such a fool as not to mean to be reconciled in time ; but I was the injured person , injured by her coldness , and I went away determined that she should make the first advances .-- I shall always congratulate myself that you were not of the Box Hill party .
" Yet not a syllable has been said to you on the subject , by either of them ."
" And so you do not consider this visit from your son as by any means certain .
But unfortunately in bestowing these embraces , a pin in her ladyship ' s head dress slightly scratching the child ' s neck , produced from this pattern of gentleness such violent screams , as could hardly be outdone by any creature professedly noisy .
When she could command Mary ' s attention , Anne quietly tried to convince her that their father and Mr Elliot had not , for many years , been on such terms as to make the power of attempting an introduction at all desirable .
Do not you know she calls every one reserved who does not talk as fast , and admire what she admires as rapturously as herself ?"
Mr . Weston -- ( laughing affectedly ) I must protest against that .-- A most dangerous precedent indeed !-- I beg you will not let your neighbours follow your example .-- Upon my word , if this is what I am to expect , we married women must begin to exert ourselves !-- Oh !
" Indeed !
poor Harriet !"
" Hush !
She had not mistaken him .
It was a more pressing concern to shew attention to Jane Fairfax , whose prospects were closing , while Harriet ' s opened , and whose engagements now allowed of no delay in any one at Highbury , who wished to shew her kindness -- and with Emma it was grown into a first wish .
While supposed to be writing only to Captain Benwick , he had been also addressing her !
I wonder what I should do with it !"
Something new for your coachman and horses to be making their way through a storm of snow ."
" Oh !
cried Mrs . Palmer , with a laugh , " I shall be quite disappointed if you do not .
But as it was , such a notion had scarcely ever entered her head , except by Mrs . Jennings ' s suggestion ; and she could not help believing herself the nicest observer of the two ;-- she watched his eyes , while Mrs . Jennings thought only of his behaviour ;-- and while his looks of anxious solicitude on Marianne ' s feeling , in her head and throat , the beginning of a heavy cold , because unexpressed by words , entirely escaped the latter lady ' s observation ;-- SHE could discover in them the quick feelings , and needless alarm of a lover .
And I protest , if I had any money to spare , I should buy a little land and build one myself , within a short distance of London , where I might drive myself down at any time , and collect a few friends about me , and be happy .
Not a stone must be added to its walls , not an inch to its size , if my feelings are regarded ."
So obliged to you for the carriage last night .
" Lady Middleton is really a most elegant woman !
It had been gradually yielding to the better hopes which her looks , or words , or actions occasionally encouraged ; it had been vanquished at last by those sentiments and those tones which had reached him while she talked with Captain Harville ; and under the irresistible governance of which he had seized a sheet of paper , and poured out his feelings .
She wanted to be alone .
Anne knew not how to understand it .
Neither more nor less than his being in love with Louisa , and not choosing to venture to Uppercross till he had had an answer from Mr Musgrove ; for it was all settled between him and her before she came away , and he had written to her father by Captain Harville .
Emma could have wished Mrs . Elton elsewhere ; but she was in a humour to have patience with every body ; and as Mrs . Elton met her with unusual graciousness , she hoped the rencontre would do them no harm .
Pardon me -- but you will be limited as to number -- only three at once ."
" Ah !
I shall never forget it .
Why was she to suspect herself of another motive ?
And it was soon over .
I have made no enquiries , because I concluded you must have been obliged to give up the party ."
A short pause of mutual thoughtfulness succeeded .
He looked rather doubtingly -- rather confused ; said something about " honour ,"-- glanced at Emma and at Harriet , and then seeing the book open on the table , took it up , and examined it very attentively .
CHAPTER 29
" Oh !
Mrs . Weston , your argument weighs most with me .
You have not heard all that you ought to hear .
He thought we walked towards Randalls most days .
Alas !
One morning , very soon after the dinner at the Musgroves , at which Anne had not been present , Captain Wentworth walked into the drawing - room at the Cottage , where were only herself and the little invalid Charles , who was lying on the sofa .
Well , I wish him out of all his trouble with all my heart , and a good wife into the bargain ."
Soon afterwards he began again ,
Were I even by any blessed chance at liberty again --"
But this does not acquit _him_ , Mrs . Weston ; and I must say , that I think him greatly to blame .
Poor man !-- it was at first a considerable shock to him , and he tried earnestly to dissuade her from it .
" But it rains ."
But for that reason , I should imagine the likeness must be chiefly confined to the females , for boys have very little teaching after an early age , and scramble into any hand they can get .
" Oh !
" Did not Colonel Brandon know of Sir John ' s proposal to your mother before it was made ?
It would excite no proper interest there .
Anne always contemplated them as some of the happiest creatures of her acquaintance ; but still , saved as we all are , by some comfortable feeling of superiority from wishing for the possibility of exchange , she would not have given up her own more elegant and cultivated mind for all their enjoyments ; and envied them nothing but that seemingly perfect good understanding and agreement together , that good - humoured mutual affection , of which she had known so little herself with either of her sisters .
" Mr . Knightley ' s air is so remarkably good that it is not fair to compare Mr . Martin with _him_ .
Her present home , he could not but observe , was unfavourable to a nervous disorder :-- confined always to one room ;-- he could have wished it otherwise -- and her good aunt , though his very old friend , he must acknowledge to be not the best companion for an invalid of that description .
But I shall see them tomorrow ."
" I should be undeserving of the confidence you have honoured me with , if I felt no desire for its continuance , or no farther curiosity on its subject .
She did not mean to have her own affections entangled again , and it would be incumbent on her to avoid any encouragement of his .
She had been taken to Charmouth too , and she had bathed , and she had gone to church , and there were a great many more people to look at in the church at Lyme than at Uppercross ; and all this , joined to the sense of being so very useful , had made really an agreeable fortnight .
" Yes , I have , presently .
" One more ;-- they would not fatigue Miss Fairfax on any account , and would only ask for one more ."
He is younger than I am ; younger in feeling , if not in fact ; younger as a man .
Lady Dalrymple ' s carriage , for which Miss Elliot was growing very impatient , now drew up ; the servant came in to announce it .
I remembered what I used to do myself .
They sang together once more ; and Emma would then resign her place to Miss Fairfax , whose performance , both vocal and instrumental , she never could attempt to conceal from herself , was infinitely superior to her own .
And though the consequent shock and alarm was very great and much more durable -- indeed I believe it was half an hour before any of us were comfortable again -- yet that was too general a sensation for any thing of peculiar anxiety to be observable .
I am sure of your kind support and aid ."
Elinor ' s satisfaction , at the moment of removal , was more positive .
Even the smooth surface of family - union seems worth preserving , though there may be nothing durable beneath .
She had never considered herself as entitled to reward for not slighting an old friend like Mrs Smith , but here was a reward indeed springing from it !
Freckles do not disgust me so very much as they do him .
how peculiarly unprepared I was !-- for I had reason to believe her very lately more determined against him , much more , than she was before ."
His abilities in every respect improve as much upon acquaintance as his manners and person .
May is the very month which Mrs . Churchill is ordered , or has ordered herself , to spend in some warmer place than Enscombe -- in short , to spend in London ; so that we have the agreeable prospect of frequent visits from Frank the whole spring -- precisely the season of the year which one should have chosen for it : days almost at the longest ; weather genial and pleasant , always inviting one out , and never too hot for exercise .
" You have made her too tall , Emma ," said Mr . Knightley .
" Oh !
Depend upon it , he will be much farther from doing _you_ justice .
I had not waited even these ten days , could I have read your feelings , as I think you must have penetrated mine .
" A family cannot well be maintained on a smaller .
You told me to observe him carefully , and let his behaviour be the rule of mine -- and so I have .
How I do wish I knew what you were at !
The country round Lyme is very fine .
Elinor could not help laughing .
Weston and Cole will be there too ; but one is apt to speak only of those who lead .-- I fancy Mr . E . and Knightley have every thing their own way ."
that ' s all .
With Mr . Weston ' s ball in view at least , there had been a great deal of insensibility to other things ; but it was now too evident that she had not attained such a state of composure as could stand against the actual approach -- new carriage , bell - ringing , and all .
Her fancy was very active .
By birth she belonged to Highbury : and when at three years old , on losing her mother , she became the property , the charge , the consolation , the fondling of her grandmother and aunt , there had seemed every probability of her being permanently fixed there ; of her being taught only what very limited means could command , and growing up with no advantages of connexion or improvement , to be engrafted on what nature had given her in a pleasing person , good understanding , and warm - hearted , well - meaning relations .
No , we should not have heard , if it had not been for this particular circumstance , of her being to come here so soon .
Sir Walter had taken a very good house in Camden Place , a lofty dignified situation , such as becomes a man of consequence ; and both he and Elizabeth were settled there , much to their satisfaction .
Dixon .-- Very well .
" My dear , dear anxious friend ,"-- said she , in mental soliloquy , while walking downstairs from her own room , " always overcareful for every body ' s comfort but your own ; I see you now in all your little fidgets , going again and again into his room , to be sure that all is right ."
She had not advanced many yards from Mrs . Goddard ' s door , when she was met by Mr . Elton himself , evidently coming towards it , and as they walked on slowly together in conversation about the invalid -- of whom he , on the rumour of considerable illness , had been going to inquire , that he might carry some report of her to Hartfield -- they were overtaken by Mr . John Knightley returning from the daily visit to Donwell , with his two eldest boys , whose healthy , glowing faces shewed all the benefit of a country run , and seemed to ensure a quick despatch of the roast mutton and rice pudding they were hastening home for .
Come , sir , pray let me hear it ."
She continued to look back , but in vain ; and soon , with what appeared unusual speed , they were half way down the hill , and every thing left far behind .
said Mrs . Dashwood , when he was leaving them .
It was a union of the highest promise of felicity in itself , and without one real , rational difficulty to oppose or delay it .
Do but look , mama , how sweet !
On their return from the park they found Willoughby ' s curricle and servant in waiting at the cottage , and Mrs . Dashwood was convinced that her conjecture had been just .
Mr . Knightley suspected in Frank Churchill the determination of catching her eye -- he seemed watching her intently -- in vain , however , if it were so -- Jane passed between them into the hall , and looked at neither .
VOLUME III
His eyes were fixed on Marianne , and , after a silence of some minutes , he said , with a faint smile , " Your sister , I understand , does not approve of second attachments ."
" Yes , I would .
He did not seem to want to be near enough for conversation .
" I am glad you think so ; and the good hands , I hope , may not be wanting ."
To Anne , it chiefly wore the prospect of an hour of agitation .
She recommended it to her daughters , therefore , by all means not to shorten their visit to Mrs . Jennings ; the length of which , though never exactly fixed , had been expected by all to comprise at least five or six weeks .
` But ,' said I , ` to be quite honest , I do not think I can live without something of a musical society .
Your sister ' s lovely person and interesting manners could not but please me ; and her behaviour to me almost from the first , was of a kind -- It is astonishing , when I reflect on what it was , and what SHE was , that my heart should have been so insensible !
The house was cleared yesterday , except of the little Harvilles ; but you will be surprised to hear they have never gone home .
" Aye , to be sure .
In what state the affair stood at present between them , Edward knew not , for no communication with any of his family had yet been attempted by him .
Its tendency would be to raise and refine her mind -- and it must be saving her from the danger of degradation .
Elinor , according to her expectation , saw on the two or three following days , that Marianne did not continue to gain strength as she had done ; but while her resolution was unsubdued , and she still tried to appear cheerful and easy , her sister could safely trust to the effect of time upon her health .
Mrs . Dashwood , too happy to be comfortable , knew not how to love Edward , nor praise Elinor enough , how to be enough thankful for his release without wounding his delicacy , nor how at once to give them leisure for unrestrained conversation together , and yet enjoy , as she wished , the sight and society of both .
Elinor made no resistance that was not easily overcome .
" Ah !
Mr Shepherd hastened to assure him , that Admiral Croft was a very hale , hearty , well - looking man , a little weather - beaten , to be sure , but not much , and quite the gentleman in all his notions and behaviour ; not likely to make the smallest difficulty about terms , only wanted a comfortable home , and to get into it as soon as possible ; knew he must pay for his convenience ; knew what rent a ready - furnished house of that consequence might fetch ; should not have been surprised if Sir Walter had asked more ; had inquired about the manor ; would be glad of the deputation , certainly , but made no great point of it ; said he sometimes took out a gun , but never killed ; quite the gentleman .
I am a little acquainted with Captain Benwick ."
They should take care of their health and their complexion .
cried his wife .--" My dear Mr . E ., you have not been to Donwell !-- You mean the Crown ; you come from the meeting at the Crown ."
" I shall soon bring him over to Hartfield ," said he , at the conclusion .
My wife should have the credit of them , however .
Compressed into the very lowest vacant corner were these words --" I had not a spare moment on Tuesday , as you know , for Miss Woodhouse ' s beautiful little friend .
Frank ' s mother would never have been slighted as she was but for her .
When we came back from Minehead he was gone down to Edward ' s , and there he has been ever since .
" You are expecting a letter , then ?"
He has walked with me , sometimes , from one end of the sands to the other , without saying a word .
" Exactly so ; that is what principally strikes me .
" Our acquaintance , however , is of many years date .
Half a minute brought it all out .
" As to that -- I do not --"
As for Willoughby -- to say that I shall soon or that I shall ever forget him , would be idle .
Emma ' s eyes were instantly withdrawn ; and she sat silently meditating , in a fixed attitude , for a few minutes .
-- but with many , many thanks --` there was no occasion to trouble us , for Mr . Knightley ' s carriage had brought , and was to take them home again .'
and it only harasses me .
" They would have solicited the honour earlier , but had been waiting the arrival of a folding - screen from London , which they hoped might keep Mr . Woodhouse from any draught of air , and therefore induce him the more readily to give them the honour of his company ."
" _His_ sufferings ," replied Emma dryly , " do not appear to have done him much harm .
His lady greeted him with some of her sparkling vivacity .
They are to be new set .
" Where -- may I ask ?-- is Miss Fairfax going ?"
" How delighted I am to see you again !
I will not allow books to prove anything ."
" Three - and - twenty !-- is he indeed ?-- Well , I could not have thought it -- and he was but two years old when he lost his poor mother !
Plain dealing was always best .
Their party was now farther reduced ; for Mr . Palmer , though very unwilling to go as well from real humanity and good - nature , as from a dislike of appearing to be frightened away by his wife , was persuaded at last by Colonel Brandon to perform his promise of following her ; and while he was preparing to go , Colonel Brandon himself , with a much greater exertion , began to talk of going likewise .-- Here , however , the kindness of Mrs . Jennings interposed most acceptably ; for to send the Colonel away while his love was in so much uneasiness on her sister ' s account , would be to deprive them both , she thought , of every comfort ; and therefore telling him at once that his stay at Cleveland was necessary to herself , that she should want him to play at piquet of an evening , while Miss Dashwood was above with her sister , & c . she urged him so strongly to remain , that he , who was gratifying the first wish of his own heart by a compliance , could not long even affect to demur ; especially as Mrs . Jennings ' s entreaty was warmly seconded by Mr . Palmer , who seemed to feel a relief to himself , in leaving behind him a person so well able to assist or advise Miss Dashwood in any emergence .
said she , when they were ready .
I assure you , Miss Anne , it prevents my wishing to see them at our house so often as I otherwise should .
It puts him quite out of heart ."
Mr . John Dashwood told his mother again and again how exceedingly sorry he was that she had taken a house at such a distance from Norland as to prevent his being of any service to her in removing her furniture .
" How often , when you were a girl , have you said to me , with one of your saucy looks --` Mr . Knightley , I am going to do so - and - so ; papa says I may , or I have Miss Taylor ' s leave '-- something which , you knew , I did not approve .
.
that ball !-- why did we wait for any thing ?-- why not seize the pleasure at once ?-- How often is happiness destroyed by preparation , foolish preparation !-- You told us it would be so .-- Oh !
It is really very good of you to come and sit with me , when you must have so many pleasanter demands upon your time ."
To Marianne it had all the distinguishing tenderness which a lover ' s heart could give , and to the rest of the family it was the affectionate attention of a son and a brother .
A line from me would bring you a little host of acquaintance ; and my particular friend , Mrs . Partridge , the lady I have always resided with when in Bath , would be most happy to shew you any attentions , and would be the very person for you to go into public with ."
His manly beauty and more than common gracefulness were instantly the theme of general admiration , and the laugh which his gallantry raised against Marianne received particular spirit from his exterior attractions .-- Marianne herself had seen less of his person that the rest , for the confusion which crimsoned over her face , on his lifting her up , had robbed her of the power of regarding him after their entering the house .
" We cannot suppose that she has any great enjoyment at the Vicarage , my dear Emma -- but it is better than being always at home .
I wanted to keep it from Jane ' s knowledge ; but , unluckily , I had mentioned it before I was aware ."
The man replied that none had .
To suffer you all to be so deceived ; to see your sister -- but what could I do ?
Anne knew that Lady Russell must be suffering some pain in understanding and relinquishing Mr Elliot , and be making some struggles to become truly acquainted with , and do justice to Captain Wentworth .
Do not let mine continue longer .
There , take my arm ; that ' s right ; I do not feel comfortable if I have not a woman there .
" No ," cried Mr . Knightley , " that need not be the consequence .
Of John I know very little , though we have lived together for years ; but of Willoughby my judgment has long been formed ."
" Happy couple !"
She had but two friends in the world to add to his list , Lady Russell and Mrs Smith .
As for Mr . Elton , his manners did not appear -- but no , she would not permit a hasty or a witty word from herself about his manners .
" And if the Dixons should absolutely deny all knowledge of it we must conclude it to come from the Campbells ."
Mrs . Weston had been shewing them all to him , and now he would shew them all to Emma ;-- fortunate in having no other resemblance to a child , than in a total want of taste for what he saw , for he was slow , constant , and methodical .-- Before this second looking over was begun , however , Emma walked into the hall for the sake of a few moments ' free observation of the entrance and ground - plot of the house -- and was hardly there , when Jane Fairfax appeared , coming quickly in from the garden , and with a look of escape .-- Little expecting to meet Miss Woodhouse so soon , there was a start at first ; but Miss Woodhouse was the very person she was in quest of .
Nobody had any information to give ; and , after a few more wonderings , Emma said ,
Depend upon it , he would not like to have his charade slighted , much better than his passion .
She says she never shall think well of anybody again ; and one cannot wonder at it , after being so deceived !-- meeting with such ingratitude , where so much kindness had been shewn , so much confidence had been placed !
" There are few among the gentlemen of the navy , I imagine , who would not be surprised to find themselves in a house of this description ."
Elizabeth had been lately forming an intimacy , which she wished to see interrupted .
It checked the idleness of one , and the business of the other .
The interruption had been short , though severe , and ease and animation returned to most of those they left as the door shut them out , but not to Anne .
From Cleveland , which was within a few miles of Bristol , the distance to Barton was not beyond one day , though a long day ' s journey ; and their mother ' s servant might easily come there to attend them down ; and as there could be no occasion of their staying above a week at Cleveland , they might now be at home in little more than three weeks ' time .
Oh !
That Mr . and Mrs . Weston did think of it , she was very strongly persuaded ; and though not meaning to be induced by him , or by any body else , to give up a situation which she believed more replete with good than any she could change it for , she had a great curiosity to see him , a decided intention of finding him pleasant , of being liked by him to a certain degree , and a sort of pleasure in the idea of their being coupled in their friends ' imaginations .
The result of his reverie was , " No , Emma , I do not think the extent of my admiration for her will ever take me by surprize .-- I never had a thought of her in that way , I assure you ."
Poor Fanny !
Mr . and Mrs . Palmer were of the party ; from the former , whom they had not seen before since their arrival in town , as he was careful to avoid the appearance of any attention to his mother - in - law , and therefore never came near her , they received no mark of recognition on their entrance .
He will connect himself well if he can ."
" THAT was exactly like Robert ,"-- was his immediate observation .--" And THAT ," he presently added , " might perhaps be in HIS head when the acquaintance between them first began .
Her person was rather good ; her face not unpretty ; but neither feature , nor air , nor voice , nor manner , were elegant .
no , no , no -- how can you suspect me of such a thing ?
Again , it was Mary ' s complaint , that Mrs Musgrove was very apt not to give her the precedence that was her due , when they dined at the Great House with other families ; and she did not see any reason why she was to be considered so much at home as to lose her place .
I have formed my plan , and am determined to enter on a course of serious study .
Elinor resolving to exert herself , though fearing the sound of her own voice , now said ,
.
" He has not been here yet ," replied Emma .
" Not at all , I believe , with you ."
Though Mrs . Jennings was in the habit of spending a large portion of the year at the houses of her children and friends , she was not without a settled habitation of her own .
The ladies knew better how to allay it .
" I did ."
Mrs Musgrove had not a word to say in dissent ; she could not accuse herself of having ever called them anything in the whole course of her life .
" I do not admire it ," said Mr . Knightley .
Of all the family , Mary was probably the one most immediately gratified by the circumstance .
After a moment ' s pause , Captain Wentworth said --
poor Miss Taylor !
As these considerations occurred to her in painful succession , she wept for him , more than for herself .
Till yesterday , I believe , she never doubted his regard ; and even now , perhaps -- but I am almost convinced that he never was really attached to her .
Now I say , my dear , in _our_ case , for _lady_ , read ---- mum !
He joined her and Marianne in the breakfast - room the next morning before the others were down ; and Marianne , who was always eager to promote their happiness as far as she could , soon left them to themselves .
I recollect .
The carriages were then ordered ; Willoughby ' s was first , and Marianne never looked happier than when she got into it .
" As a friend !"
I am sure I would rather do any thing in the world than be thought so by a person whose good opinion is so well worth having as yours .
Lord bless me !
It is impossible to refuse what you ask in such a way .
" Only four - and - twenty .
You are very fond of bending little minds ; but where little minds belong to rich people in authority , I think they have a knack of swelling out , till they are quite as unmanageable as great ones .
It had been serviceable in deadening the first shock , without retaining any influence to alarm .
" Perhaps ," continued Elinor , " if I should happen to cut out , I may be of some use to Miss Lucy Steele , in rolling her papers for her ; and there is so much still to be done to the basket , that it must be impossible I think for her labour singly , to finish it this evening .
cried Marianne .
It is my party .
Her visit to Abbey - Mill , this summer , seems to have done his business .
The first question on her side , which led to farther particulars , was ,
She would have been ashamed to look her family in the face the next morning , had she not risen from her bed in more need of repose than when she lay down in it .
Of all the sources of evil surrounding the former , since her coming to Highbury , she was persuaded that she must herself have been the worst .
" I should have thought ," said Anne , " that my manner to yourself might have spared you much or all of this ."
Let me hear from you without delay ; I am impatient for a thousand particulars .
" But it is never safe to sit out of doors , my dear ."
Often as she had wished for and ordered it , she had never been able to get any thing tolerable .
They came from Birmingham , which is not a place to promise much , you know , Mr . Weston .
His regret increased as he listened .
Her husband had been extravagant ; and at his death , about two years before , had left his affairs dreadfully involved .
Call it gossip , if you will , but when Nurse Rooke has half an hour ' s leisure to bestow on me , she is sure to have something to relate that is entertaining and profitable : something that makes one know one ' s species better .
But , on the other hand , she could not admit herself to be unhappy , nor , after the first morning , to be less disposed for employment than usual ; she was still busy and cheerful ; and , pleasing as he was , she could yet imagine him to have faults ; and farther , though thinking of him so much , and , as she sat drawing or working , forming a thousand amusing schemes for the progress and close of their attachment , fancying interesting dialogues , and inventing elegant letters ; the conclusion of every imaginary declaration on his side was that she _refused_ _him_ .
It would be a great pleasure to know Robert Martin .
" It appears to me a plan that nobody can object to , if Mr . and Mrs . Weston do not .
Mr . Woodhouse ' s peculiarities and fidgetiness were sometimes provoking him to a rational remonstrance or sharp retort equally ill - bestowed .
Better pass it off as a joke .
I have a great value for Benwick ; and when one can but get him to talk , he has plenty to say .
Nothing was wanting on Mrs . Palmer ' s side that constant and friendly good humour could do , to make them feel themselves welcome .
But as he required the promise , I could not do less than give it ; at least I thought so at the time .
In all their walks , he had had to jump her from the stiles ; the sensation was delightful to her .
" Did you see them off , before you came away ?"
Mrs . Weston said no more ; and Emma could imagine with what surprize and mortification she must be returning to her seat .
Good fires and carriages would be much more to the purpose in most cases of delicate health , and I dare say in her ' s .
He was very much pleased with Randalls , thought it a most admirably arranged house , would hardly allow it even to be very small , admired the situation , the walk to Highbury , Highbury itself , Hartfield still more , and professed himself to have always felt the sort of interest in the country which none but one ' s _own_ country gives , and the greatest curiosity to visit it .
His complexion was white with agitation , and he looked as if fearful of his reception , and conscious that he merited no kind one .
Tell me what it is , explain the grounds on which you acted , and I shall be satisfied , in being able to satisfy you .
There is jealousy .
" Not entirely .
He would mention no names now ; but such , he could assure her , had been the fact .
They were off ; and Emma could breathe .
Marianne ' s countenance sunk .
In showing kindness to his cousins therefore he had the real satisfaction of a good heart ; and in settling a family of females only in his cottage , he had all the satisfaction of a sportsman ; for a sportsman , though he esteems only those of his sex who are sportsmen likewise , is not often desirous of encouraging their taste by admitting them to a residence within his own manor .
Elinor sighed over the fancied necessity of this ; but to a man and a soldier she presumed not to censure it .
It was the same , the very same man , with no difference but of dress .
Marianne was quite subdued .--
" They have borne more than our conduct .-- Do not , my dearest Elinor , let your kindness defend what I know your judgment must censure .
" But , could you be comfortable yourself , to be spending the whole evening away from the poor boy ?"
This was the occurrence :-- The Coles had been settled some years in Highbury , and were very good sort of people -- friendly , liberal , and unpretending ; but , on the other hand , they were of low origin , in trade , and only moderately genteel .
The business was finished , and Harriet safe .
" And who is Admiral Croft ?"
_He_ had done it .
" Ah !
" Very pretty , sir , upon my word ; to send me on here , to be an encumbrance to my friends , so long before you vouchsafe to come !-- But you knew what a dutiful creature you had to deal with .
At this time of the year , and after such a series of rain , we shall certainly have very little more of it .
Mutual enquiries on common subjects passed : neither of them , probably , much the wiser for what they heard , and Anne continuing fully sensible of his being less at ease than formerly .
This suspicion was given by some words which accidently dropped from him one evening at the park , when they were sitting down together by mutual consent , while the others were dancing .
We consulted together , however , as to what should be done , and at last she determined to send for Edward .
" One had rather , on such occasions , do too much than too little .
" I hope I should know better ," he replied ; " no , depend upon it , ( with a gallant bow ,) that in addressing Mrs . Weston I should understand whom I might praise without any danger of being thought extravagant in my terms ."
It was not so very bad .
They had stopped at Mrs . Bates ' s door to offer the use of their carriage , but the aunt and niece were to be brought by the Eltons .
The nature of her commendation , in the present case , however , happened to be particularly ill - suited to the feelings of two thirds of her auditors , and was so very unexhilarating to Edward , that he very soon got up to go away .
I hope she is right .-- In one respect , my good fortune is undoubted , that of being able to subscribe myself , Your obliged and affectionate Son , F . C . WESTON CHURCHILL .
There was no reason to suppose Mr . Elton thought at all differently from his wife .
said Emma , laughing .
Henrietta was perhaps the prettiest , Louisa had the higher spirits ; and she knew not now , whether the more gentle or the more lively character were most likely to attract him .
Had she been a person of consequence herself , he would have come I dare say ; and it would not have signified whether he did or no .
-- He met her at the parlour - door , and hardly asking her how she did , in the natural key of his voice , sunk it immediately , to say , unheard by her father ,
But there was one method so direct , so simple , and in her opinion so eligible of knowing the real state of the affair , and of instantly removing all mystery , that she could not help suggesting it to her mother .
I believe you equal to every important exertion , and to every domestic forbearance , so long as -- if I may be allowed the expression -- so long as you have an object .
" The evil of the distance from Enscombe ," said Mr . Weston , " is , that Mrs . Churchill , _as_ _we_ _understand_ , has not been able to leave the sofa for a week together .
My mother does not hear ; she is a little deaf you know .
" One can suppose nothing else ," added Mrs . Cole , " and I was only surprized that there could ever have been a doubt .
If he really sought to reconcile himself like a dutiful branch , he must be forgiven for having dismembered himself from the paternal tree .
But I do flatter myself , my dear Jane , that my influence is not entirely worn out .
At first , if you had not told me that more wonderful things had happened ; that there had been matches of greater disparity ( those were your very words );-- I should not have dared to give way to -- I should not have thought it possible -- But if _you_ , who had been always acquainted with him --"
I am very happy .
I think she would be so much pleased with his mind , that she would very soon see no deficiency in his manner ."
Marianne said no more , but looked exceedingly hurt .
For a few moments her imagination and her heart were bewitched .
If she has it now , you have given it .
Uppercross was a moderate - sized village , which a few years back had been completely in the old English style , containing only two houses superior in appearance to those of the yeomen and labourers ; the mansion of the squire , with its high walls , great gates , and old trees , substantial and unmodernized , and the compact , tight parsonage , enclosed in its own neat garden , with a vine and a pear - tree trained round its casements ; but upon the marriage of the young ' squire , it had received the improvement of a farm - house elevated into a cottage , for his residence , and Uppercross Cottage , with its veranda , French windows , and other prettiness , was quite as likely to catch the traveller ' s eye as the more consistent and considerable aspect and premises of the Great House , about a quarter of a mile farther on .
Poor souls !
" Dear me !-- it is so odd to hear a woman talk so !"
Depend upon it he had encouragement ."
" Here is April come !"
" Dear Mrs . Weston , how could you think of such a thing ?-- Mr .
The other two warmly agreed with what he said , and she then appeared .
" Ha !
She loved Anne better than she loved her own abilities ; and when the awkwardness of the beginning was over , found little hardship in attaching herself as a mother to the man who was securing the happiness of her other child .
" Indeed , I am very sorry to be right in this instance .
Frank Churchill had behaved very ill by herself -- very ill in many ways ,-- but it was not so much _his_ behaviour as her _own_ , which made her so angry with him .
yes , I observed it , I assure you .
that I had been satisfied with persuading her not to accept young Martin .
Yes , I am sure : carry her gently to the inn ."
So you would all .
" My dear papa , I sent the whole hind - quarter .
But a day spent in sitting shivering over the fire with a book in her hand , which she was unable to read , or in lying , weary and languid , on a sofa , did not speak much in favour of her amendment ; and when , at last , she went early to bed , more and more indisposed , Colonel Brandon was only astonished at her sister ' s composure , who , though attending and nursing her the whole day , against Marianne inclination , and forcing proper medicines on her at night , trusted , like Marianne , to the certainty and efficacy of sleep , and felt no real alarm .
" You take up an idea , Mrs . Weston , and run away with it ; as you have many a time reproached me with doing .
She played over every favourite song that she had been used to play to Willoughby , every air in which their voices had been oftenest joined , and sat at the instrument gazing on every line of music that he had written out for her , till her heart was so heavy that no farther sadness could be gained ; and this nourishment of grief was every day applied .
" I have been considering what we had best do .
is it really true ?"
.
Sir John did not much understand this reproof ; but he laughed as heartily as if he did , and then replied ,
Poor Marianne , languid and low from the nature of her malady , and feeling herself universally ill , could no longer hope that tomorrow would find her recovered ; and the idea of what tomorrow would have produced , but for this unlucky illness , made every ailment severe ; for on that day they were to have begun their journey home ; and , attended the whole way by a servant of Mrs . Jennings , were to have taken their mother by surprise on the following forenoon .
Emma was sadly fearful that this second disappointment would be more severe than the first .
She continued by the side of her sister , with little intermission the whole afternoon , calming every fear , satisfying every inquiry of her enfeebled spirits , supplying every succour , and watching almost every look and every breath .
CHAPTER 39
Chapter 5
He came to ask me whether I thought it would be imprudent in him to settle so early ; whether I thought her too young : in short , whether I approved his choice altogether ; having some apprehension perhaps of her being considered ( especially since _your_ making so much of her ) as in a line of society above him .
" But I do not see why poor Isabella should be obliged to go back so soon , though he does .
" But , unfortunately , sir , my time is so limited --"
" Oh !
They are seen only as a nuisance , swept hastily off , and driven as much as possible from the sight ."
Emma had not been thinking of him , she had forgotten to think of him -- but she was very glad to see him .
" Certainly ," said Elinor ; " and assisted by her liberality , I hope you may yet live to be in easy circumstances ."
We sailors , Miss Elliot , cannot afford to make long courtships in time of war .
She was sure of Mrs . Weston ' s wishing it to be communicated ; especially to one , who , like Mr . Knightley , had seen so much to blame in his conduct .
" I felt myself ," she added , " to be as solemnly engaged to him , as if the strictest legal covenant had bound us to each other ."
Though much might be fancy , he could not doubt , when he looked back , that she was in a weaker state of health than she had been half a year ago .
Elinor blushed in spite of herself .
This was an article not to be entered on by himself ; but a very intimate friend of his , a Colonel Wallis , a highly respectable man , perfectly the gentleman , ( and not an ill - looking man , Sir Walter added ), who was living in very good style in Marlborough Buildings , and had , at his own particular request , been admitted to their acquaintance through Mr Elliot , had mentioned one or two things relative to the marriage , which made a material difference in the discredit of it .
How it might be considered by the rest of the party , she could not tell .
" Oh !
It was the answer to the communication of his intended marriage .
taking a last look at the picture , as they began to be in motion .
She never had been so depressed .
" I would not go away without seeing you , but I have no time to spare , and therefore must now be gone directly .
And where are your sisters ?
" In defence of your protege you can even be saucy ."
It is a corner room , and has windows on two sides .
every comfort of life knocked off !
I met her frequently at Weymouth .
CHAPTER XI
A very few days more , and Captain Wentworth was known to be at Kellynch , and Mr Musgrove had called on him , and come back warm in his praise , and he was engaged with the Crofts to dine at Uppercross , by the end of another week .
" She must be under some sort of penance , inflicted either by the Campbells or herself .
I shall certainly be at leisure ."
And how tired you must be after your journey !
I understand it was a very handsome letter , indeed .
But , fair or not fair , there are unbecoming conjunctions , which reason will patronize in vain -- which taste cannot tolerate -- which ridicule will seize .
We are quite near relations , you know ; and Mr Elliot too , whom you ought so particularly to be acquainted with !
" The notions of a young man of one or two and twenty ," said he , " as to what is necessary in manners to make him quite the thing , are more absurd , I believe , than those of any other set of beings in the world .
But have you likewise heard that Miss Grey has fifty thousand pounds ?
" If you would but let us know what your business is ," said Mrs . Jennings , " we might see whether it could be put off or not ."
I have some little concern in the business , as well as yourself , for Lucy Steele is my cousin , and I believe there is not a better kind of girl in the world , nor one who more deserves a good husband ."
But Mrs . Dixon must be very much disappointed .
" Ah !
CHAPTER XVI
Colonel Brandon , who was here only ten minutes ago , has desired me to say , that understanding you mean to take orders , he has great pleasure in offering you the living of Delaford now just vacant , and only wishes it were more valuable .
She had no doubt of Harriet ' s happiness with any good - tempered man ; but with him , and in the home he offered , there would be the hope of more , of security , stability , and improvement .
She doted on him ."
I never saw any thing so hard .
Mr . Martin , I imagine , has his fortune entirely to make -- cannot be at all beforehand with the world .
CHAPTER 19
" She has taken it into her head that Enscombe is too cold for her .
If I meet with no insuperable difficulties therefore , consider that point as settled ."
Their tendency is gross and illiberal ; and if their construction could ever be deemed clever , time has long ago destroyed all its ingenuity ."
She would be a loser in every way .
" That ' s easily said , and easily felt by you , who have always been your own master .
Harriet did think him all perfection , and maintained the non - existence of any body equal to him in person or goodness -- and did , in truth , prove herself more resolutely in love than Emma had foreseen ; but yet it appeared to her so natural , so inevitable to strive against an inclination of that sort _unrequited_ , that she could not comprehend its continuing very long in equal force .
It was well to have a comfort in store on Harriet ' s behalf , though it might be wise to let the fancy touch it seldom ; for evil in that quarter was at hand .
It is but natural that he should like to see her as well as ourselves ."
The apples themselves are the very finest sort for baking , beyond a doubt ; all from Donwell -- some of Mr . Knightley ' s most liberal supply .
Men of family would not be very fond of connecting themselves with a girl of such obscurity -- and most prudent men would be afraid of the inconvenience and disgrace they might be involved in , when the mystery of her parentage came to be revealed .
" Will you read the letter ?"
" It is to be a secret , I conclude ," said he .
The symptoms were favourable .-- Instead of answering , Harriet turned away confused , and stood thoughtfully by the fire ; and though the letter was still in her hand , it was now mechanically twisted about without regard .
" Cautious , very cautious ," thought Emma ; " he advances inch by inch , and will hazard nothing till he believes himself secure ."
Have you no comforts ?
This was enough to make Lucy really and reasonably happy .
I can safely say that he has never gave me one moment ' s alarm on that account from the first ."
Did not I do right ?-- And I suppose you had no great difficulty -- You did not find him very unwilling to accept your proposal ?"
Once she felt that he was looking at herself , observing her altered features , perhaps , trying to trace in them the ruins of the face which had once charmed him ; and once she knew that he must have spoken of her ; she was hardly aware of it , till she heard the answer ; but then she was sure of his having asked his partner whether Miss Elliot never danced ?
She asked after their mutual friends ; they were all well .-- When had he left them ?-- Only that morning .
I was very much pleased with all that he said .
But you will not give me your advice , Miss Dashwood ?"
" Oh !
" Much , indeed !"
he cried , " I wish your father might be half as easily convinced as John will be , of our having every right that equal worth can give , to be happy together .
" Yes , do ."
` To do the best for himself ,' passed as a duty ."
But though I was always doing wrong things , they were very bad wrong things , and such as did me no service .-- It would have been a much better transgression had I broken the bond of secrecy and told you every thing ."
Emma made no answer , and tried to look cheerfully unconcerned , but was really feeling uncomfortable and wanting him very much to be gone .
Anne Elliot , so young ; known to so few , to be snatched off by a stranger without alliance or fortune ; or rather sunk by him into a state of most wearing , anxious , youth - killing dependence !
Mrs Smith gave her a penetrating glance , and then , smiling , said --
She never could accept him .
As I tell Mr . E ., you are a thorough humourist .-- Yes , believe me , Knightley , I am fully sensible of your attention to me in the whole of this scheme .
added Miss Steele .
Will that do ?
After listening to this full description of Mr Elliot , Anne could not but express some surprise at Mrs Smith ' s having spoken of him so favourably in the beginning of their conversation .
The couplet does not cease to be , nor does its meaning change .
" My picture !-- But he has left my picture in Bond - street ."
And besides all this , I am afraid , Mamma , he has no real taste .
That Lucy was disposed to be jealous of her appeared very probable : it was plain that Edward had always spoken highly in her praise , not merely from Lucy ' s assertion , but from her venturing to trust her on so short a personal acquaintance , with a secret so confessedly and evidently important .
Miss Woodhouse , what can we do about that ?"
I shall be sure to say three dull things as soon as ever I open my mouth , shan ' t I ?
He engaged to be with them by four o ' clock .
Leave it all to me .
Captain Wentworth was acknowledged again by each , by Elizabeth more graciously than before .
" Ever hear her !"
" He opened his whole heart to me yesterday as we travelled .
Her astonishment at what she heard was at first too great for words ; but at length forcing herself to speak , and to speak cautiously , she said , with calmness of manner , which tolerably well concealed her surprise and solicitude -- " May I ask if your engagement is of long standing ?"
I hope your father and mother are quite happy with regard to both ."
If she would only wear rouge she would not be afraid of being seen ; but last time I called , I observed the blinds were let down immediately ."
I always preferred the church , as I still do .
His sister had a letter from him yesterday , in which he tells us of it , and he had just had it in a letter from Harville , written upon the spot , from Uppercross .
Harriet had no penetration .
Their own good - nature must point out to them the real cruelty of appearing to know any thing about it when she is present ; and the less that may ever be said to myself on the subject , the more my feelings will be spared , as you my dear madam will easily believe ."
Mr Elliot would do nothing , and she could do nothing herself , equally disabled from personal exertion by her state of bodily weakness , and from employing others by her want of money .
He is the most fearful of giving pain , of wounding expectation , and the most incapable of being selfish , of any body I ever saw .
She desired nothing better herself .
" I have frequently detected myself in such kind of mistakes ," said Elinor , " in a total misapprehension of character in some point or other : fancying people so much more gay or grave , or ingenious or stupid than they really are , and I can hardly tell why or in what the deception originated .
Is nothing due to the man whom we have all such reason to love , and no reason in the world to think ill of ?
A letter from his friend , Captain Harville , having found him out at last , had brought intelligence of Captain Harville ' s being settled with his family at Lyme for the winter ; of their being therefore , quite unknowingly , within twenty miles of each other .
She was not immediately able to say anything , and even when her spirits were recovered , she debated for a short time , on the answer it would be most proper to give .
The young ladies of Highbury might have walked again in safety before their panic began , and the whole history dwindled soon into a matter of little importance but to Emma and her nephews :-- in her imagination it maintained its ground , and Henry and John were still asking every day for the story of Harriet and the gipsies , and still tenaciously setting her right if she varied in the slightest particular from the original recital .
" Did you observe the woman who opened the door to you when you called yesterday ?"
" Aye , aye , I see how it will be ," said Sir John , " I see how it will be .
She might do very well by herself .
And poor John ' s son came to talk to Mr . Elton about relief from the parish ; he is very well to do himself , you know , being head man at the Crown , ostler , and every thing of that sort , but still he cannot keep his father without some help ; and so , when Mr . Elton came back , he told us what John ostler had been telling him , and then it came out about the chaise having been sent to Randalls to take Mr . Frank Churchill to Richmond .
They were not much interested in anything relative to Anne ; but still there were questions enough asked , to make it understood what this old schoolfellow was ; and Elizabeth was disdainful , and Sir Walter severe .
In the centre of some of the best preserves in the kingdom , surrounded by three great proprietors , each more careful and jealous than the other ; and to two of the three at least , Charles Hayter might get a special recommendation .
" He is a most fortunate man !"
He has not such a fine air and way of walking as Mr . Knightley .
" Aye , do , Frank .-- Go and fetch Miss Bates , and let us end the matter at once .
" Captain Benwick , would not it be better for Captain Benwick ?
She speaks a little too quick .
Such might be his constitution ; and as she knew that eating and drinking were often the cure of such incidental complaints , she recommended his taking some refreshment ; he would find abundance of every thing in the dining - room -- and she humanely pointed out the door .
" I cannot help wondering at your knowing so little of Emma as to say any such thing .
" I shall very soon think him handsome , Elinor , if I do not now .
He had time only to say ,
They were not off the Cobb , before the Harvilles met them .
No suspicious flourishes now of apology or concern ; it was the language of real feeling towards Mrs . Weston ; and the transition from Highbury to Enscombe , the contrast between the places in some of the first blessings of social life was just enough touched on to shew how keenly it was felt , and how much more might have been said but for the restraints of propriety .-- The charm of her own name was not wanting .
He agreed to it , but with so quiet a " Yes ," as inclined her almost to doubt his real concurrence ; and yet there must be a very distinct sort of elegance for the fashionable world , if Jane Fairfax could be thought only ordinarily gifted with it .
" You are better placed _here_ ; very fit for a wife , but not at all for a governess .
Yet after a time I DID say , for at first I was quite overcome -- that if she lived , as I trusted she might , my greatest happiness would lie in promoting their marriage ; and since our arrival , since our delightful security , I have repeated it to him more fully , have given him every encouragement in my power .
It had been in situation .
If you knew what a consolation it was to me to relieve my heart speaking to you of what I am always thinking of every moment of my life , your compassion would make you overlook every thing else I am sure ."
" It is hotter to - day ."
" Dear Smith ,-- I have received yours .
" No , sir , she is not one - and - thirty ; but I do not think I can put off my engagement , because it is the only evening for some time which will at once suit her and myself .
-- Even Mr . Weston shook his head , and looked solemn , and said , " Ah !
you will never guess .
Mrs . Elton is very good - natured and agreeable , and I dare say her acquaintance are just what they ought to be .
By only raising my voice , and saying any thing two or three times over , she is sure to hear ; but then she is used to my voice .
" And do you see her , sir , tolerably often ?"
In two minutes after Charles ' s preparation , the others appeared ; they were in the drawing - room .
I understand she is a woman of very good fortune .
" Is your sister ill ?"
But Mr . Weston is almost an old man .
Anne was not animated to an equal pitch by the circumstance , but she felt that she would rather see Mr Elliot again than not , which was more than she could say for many other persons in Bath .
Her introductions and recommendations must all wait , and every projected party be still only talked of .
" I only mean that I suppose , from your manner of speaking , it must be the same to Miss Morton whether she marry Edward or Robert ."
Elinor , unable herself to determine whether it were better for Marianne to be in London or at Barton , offered no counsel of her own except of patience till their mother ' s wishes could be known ; and at length she obtained her sister ' s consent to wait for that knowledge .
This , on his side , might merely proceed from her not being thought of ; but Emma was rather inclined to attribute it to delicacy , and a suspicion , from some appearances , that their friendship were declining .
He was not a great favourite with his fair sister - in - law .
Referring the education to her seemed to imply it .
And I know he has read the Vicar of Wakefield .
I saw she had execution , but I did not know she had any taste .
Mr . Elton is good - humoured , cheerful , obliging , and gentle .
He was always agreeable and obliging , and speaking pleasantly of every body .
When he told me that it might be many weeks before we met again -- his distress -- can I ever forget his distress ?"
Or Miss Bates ?
Frank Churchill , of whom , in the eagerness of her conversation with Mrs . Weston , she had been seeing nothing , except that he had found a seat by Miss Fairfax , followed Mr . Cole , to add his very pressing entreaties ; and as , in every respect , it suited Emma best to lead , she gave a very proper compliance .
She was mortified , shocked , confounded .
He was exactly formed to engage Marianne ' s heart , for with all this , he joined not only a captivating person , but a natural ardour of mind which was now roused and increased by the example of her own , and which recommended him to her affection beyond every thing else .
FINIS
Had Edward been intentionally deceiving her ?
` My dear ,' said I , ` you will blind yourself '-- for tears were in her eyes perpetually .
-- he cried , after hearing what she said --" what could be the Colonel ' s motive ?"
My mother says the orchard was always famous in her younger days .
They will tell me I should write to the Doctor , to get Edward the curacy of his new living .
He had not seen me then above twice , for it was before I left school .
Others even arose to confirm it .
From their counsel , or their conversation , she knew she could receive no assistance , their tenderness and sorrow must add to her distress , while her self - command would neither receive encouragement from their example nor from their praise .
Her indignation would have been still stronger than it was , had she not witnessed that embarrassment which seemed to speak a consciousness of his own misconduct , and prevented her from believing him so unprincipled as to have been sporting with the affections of her sister from the first , without any design that would bear investigation .
The remainder of Anne ' s time at Uppercross , comprehending only two days , was spent entirely at the Mansion House ; and she had the satisfaction of knowing herself extremely useful there , both as an immediate companion , and as assisting in all those arrangements for the future , which , in Mr and Mrs Musgrove ' s distressed state of spirits , would have been difficulties .
Her approbation , at once general and minute , warm and incessant , could not but please ; and for another half - hour they were all walking to and fro , between the different rooms , some suggesting , some attending , and all in happy enjoyment of the future .
It was unvarying , warm admiration everywhere ; but this intimate footing was not more than established , when a certain Charles Hayter returned among them , to be a good deal disturbed by it , and to think Captain Wentworth very much in the way .
Charles Hayter had met with much to disquiet and mortify him in his cousin ' s behaviour .
She had little hope of success ; but Elizabeth , who in the event of such a reverse would be so much more to be pitied than herself , should never , she thought , have reason to reproach her for giving no warning .
He has not been forced upon any exertion .
These were claims which he did not learn to overlook , though some years passed away from the death of poor Fairfax , before his own return to England put any thing in his power .
I had known you by character , however , long before ."
They will one day be Mr . Willoughby ' s , and --"
" I wonder he did not remember the book "-- was all Harriet ' s answer , and spoken with a degree of grave displeasure which Emma thought might be safely left to itself .
Every year since my coming of age , or even before , I believe , had added to my debts ; and though the death of my old cousin , Mrs . Smith , was to set me free ; yet that event being uncertain , and possibly far distant , it had been for some time my intention to re - establish my circumstances by marrying a woman of fortune .
My dear cousin " ( sitting down by her ), " you have a better right to be fastidious than almost any other woman I know ; but will it answer ?
" We must be decided , and without the loss of another minute .
I saw her as I came in ; she was standing in the entrance .
After a short pause he resumed the conversation by saying ,--
You may have done wrong with regard to Mr . Dixon , but this is a punishment beyond what you can have merited !-- The kindness and protection of Mrs .
She had been repeatedly very earnest in trying to get Anne included in the visit to London , sensibly open to all the injustice and all the discredit of the selfish arrangements which shut her out , and on many lesser occasions had endeavoured to give Elizabeth the advantage of her own better judgement and experience ; but always in vain : Elizabeth would go her own way ; and never had she pursued it in more decided opposition to Lady Russell than in this selection of Mrs Clay ; turning from the society of so deserving a sister , to bestow her affection and confidence on one who ought to have been nothing to her but the object of distant civility .
She had depended on a twilight walk to the Grecian temple , and perhaps all over the grounds , and an evening merely cold or damp would not have deterred her from it ; but a heavy and settled rain even SHE could not fancy dry or pleasant weather for walking .
She recognised the whole of Lucy in the message , and was very confident that Edward would never come near them .
You will soon have exhausted each favourite topic .
Elinor was quite of her opinion , as to the probability of their not waiting for any thing more .
CHAPTER XV
And so she began inquiring after her directly , saying , ` I know you cannot have heard from Jane lately , because it is not her time for writing ;' and when I immediately said , ` But indeed we have , we had a letter this very morning ,' I do not know that I ever saw any body more surprized .
" Till I have a letter from Colonel Campbell ," said she , in a voice of forced calmness , " I can imagine nothing with any confidence .
To Hartfield , if you please , Mrs .
I leave you to your own reflections ."
" How often we shall be going to see them , and they coming to see us !-- We shall be always meeting !
" They had already spent a week in this manner in Conduit Street , and Lady Middleton could not be displeased at their giving the same number of days to such near relations ."
Mr . Knightley saw no such passion , and of course thought nothing of its effects ; but she saw too much of it to feel a doubt of its overcoming any hesitations that a reasonable prudence might originally suggest ; and more than a reasonable , becoming degree of prudence , she was very sure did not belong to Mr . Elton .
They were to meet Mrs . Ferrars ; but Elinor could not learn whether her sons were to be of the party .
In a firm , though cautious tone , Elinor thus began .
" How ?-- They were invited , were not they ?"
Miss Bates , let Emma help you to a _little_ bit of tart -- a _very_ little bit .
" The little Durands were there , I conclude ," said she , " with their mouths open to catch the music , like unfledged sparrows ready to be fed .
" Encouragement !-- I give you encouragement !-- Sir , you have been entirely mistaken in supposing it .
It was so humiliating to reflect on the constant deception practised on her father and Elizabeth ; to consider the various sources of mortification preparing for them !
It was being very deficient ."
-- hesitatingly it was said .--" Or will it be wrong ?-- I can talk of it now , I hope , as I ought to do ."
She was obliged to kneel down by the sofa , and remain there to satisfy her patient ; and thus they continued a few minutes , when , to her very great satisfaction , she heard some other person crossing the little vestibule .
Such an end of the doleful disappointment of five weeks back !
" I do not know .
There is great fear , great caution , great resolution somewhere .-- She is _not_ to be with the _Dixons_ .
" It would be something remarkable , now ," he continued , " something droll , if Fanny should have a brother and I a sister settling at the same time .
What might not eight years do ?
Both felt rather anxious to hear him speak again ; and after a few minutes silence , he said ,
I am not sensible of having done anything wrong in walking over Mrs . Smith ' s grounds , or in seeing her house .
She then found them talking of " Frederick ."
" That conviction must be every thing to you ; and he is undoubtedly supported by the same trust in your ' s .
Mrs . Palmer laughed , and said it would not do her any harm .
They talk and laugh a great deal too much for me .
He never read the Romance of the Forest , nor The Children of the Abbey .
The shock of Colonel Brandon ' s errand at Barton had been much softened to Mrs . Dashwood by her own previous alarm ; for so great was her uneasiness about Marianne , that she had already determined to set out for Cleveland on that very day , without waiting for any further intelligence , and had so far settled her journey before his arrival , that the Careys were then expected every moment to fetch Margaret away , as her mother was unwilling to take her where there might be infection .
But in the interim -- in the interim of the very few hours that were to pass , before I could have an opportunity of speaking with her in private -- a circumstance occurred -- an unlucky circumstance , to ruin all my resolution , and with it all my comfort .
" Yes : but a young lady -- a bride -- I ought to have paid my respects to her if possible .
replied he .
We must look to her one fault , and remember that she had done a wrong thing in consenting to the engagement , to bear that she should have been in such a state of punishment ."
Pray , dear Miss Woodhouse , tell me what I ought to do ."
" And yet ," said Anne to herself , as they now moved forward to meet the party , " he has not , perhaps , a more sorrowing heart than I have .
" Yes , here I am , Sophia , quite ready to make a foolish match .
They played me a pitiful trick once : got away with some of my best men .
Never worth remembering .
said she .
I am delighted to find that you can vouchsafe to let your imagination wander -- but it will not do -- very sorry to check you in your first essay -- but indeed it will not do .
In that house Elizabeth must be first ; and she was in the habit of such general observance as " Miss Elliot ," that any particularity of attention seemed almost impossible .
Emma hung about him affectionately , and smiled , and said it must be so ; and that he must not class her with Isabella and Mrs . Weston , whose marriages taking them from Hartfield , had , indeed , made a melancholy change : but she was not going from Hartfield ; she should be always there ; she was introducing no change in their numbers or their comforts but for the better ; and she was very sure that he would be a great deal the happier for having Mr . Knightley always at hand , when he were once got used to the idea .-- Did he not love Mr . Knightley very much ?-- He would not deny that he did , she was sure .-- Whom did he ever want to consult on business but Mr .
Isabella and Emma , I think , do write very much alike .
Did not I see them together in Devonshire every day , and all day long ; and did not I know that your sister came to town with me on purpose to buy wedding clothes ?
" Ungrateful !-- What do you mean ?"
she cried , looking aghast .
Elinor could hardly keep her countenance as she assented to the hardship of such an obligation .
" This is very kind of Anne ," was her husband ' s answer , " and I should be very glad to have you go ; but it seems rather hard that she should be left at home by herself , to nurse our sick child ."
A few minutes made Emma acquainted with the whole .
It is a necessary of life to me ; and having always been used to a very musical society , both at Maple Grove and in Bath , it would have been a most serious sacrifice .
CHAPTER 18
Immediately surrounding Mrs Musgrove were the little Harvilles , whom she was sedulously guarding from the tyranny of the two children from the Cottage , expressly arrived to amuse them .
She could not but suppose it to be a match that every body who knew them must think of .
Perry ?-- Has he been here this morning ?-- And how does he travel now ?-- Has he set up his carriage ?"
What were nine miles to a young man ?-- An hour ' s ride .
I could not believe it .-- My mother was the first person who told me of it ; and I , feeling myself called on to act with resolution , immediately said to her , ' My dear madam , I do not know what you may intend to do on the occasion , but as for myself , I must say , that if Edward does marry this young woman , I never will see him again .'
No objection was raised on the father ' s side ; the young man was treated liberally ; it was all as it should be : and as Emma became acquainted with Robert Martin , who was now introduced at Hartfield , she fully acknowledged in him all the appearance of sense and worth which could bid fairest for her little friend .
So , I give you notice , Lady Russell ."
He took the opposite chair , and for half a minute not a word was said by either .
I would not disappoint the little angel for all the world : and if you want me at the card - table now , I am resolved to finish the basket after supper ."
When I am quite determined as to the time , I am not at all afraid of being long unemployed .
Cole does not want to be wiser or wittier than his neighbours ."
When she told Marianne what she had done , however , her first reply was not very auspicious .